State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Azamgarh
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Northern Plain, Hot Subhumib (Dry) Eco-sub region (9.2)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) Middle Gangetic Plain Region (IV)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Eastern Plain Zone (UP-9)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Barabanki,Ambedkarnagar,Faizabad,Sultanpur,Azamgarh,Mau,Jaunpur,Varanasi, Gazipur,
Zone*(*>50% area falling in the zone) Ballia,Bhadohi
Geographic coordinates of district headquarters Latitude Longitude Altitude
26’o03’ N 83o13’ E 91-190 m
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ Directorate of Research, SAU, Kumarganj
ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with KVK Azamgarh
address
1.2 Normal Onset Normal Cessation
Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days
SW monsoon (June-Sep) 899.7 42 3rd week of June 1st week of October
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec) 73.6 6
Winter (Jan- Feb) 51.8 4
Summer (March-May) 78.4 2
Annual 1103.5 54
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
the agricultural Misc. tree land
district use crops and
groves
1
Area (‘000 424.0 302.8 0.11 59.7 1.4 6.0 6.6 6.6 32.5 8.0
ha)
1. 4 Major Soils (common names like red Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total Geographical area
sandy loam deep soils (etc.,)*
Sandy loam soils 203.2
Clay loam Soils 86.5
Others ( problematic soils)-Sodic soils 158.1
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity(% )
Net sown area 302.87
Area sown more than once - 172.4
Gross cropped area -
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 283
Gross irrigated area 368
Rainfed area -
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 71.0 19.3
Tanks 0.004
Open wells 0.1
Bore wells 17.5 174 47.2
Lift irrigation schemes
Micro-irrigation
Other sources
Total Irrigated Area 368.3
Pump sets 135 36.6
2
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils such as high levels of arsenic, fluoride,
Department /Board) saline etc)
Over exploited
Critical
Semi- critical
Safe
Wastewater availability and use
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (2008-09)
- Major field crops cultivated Area (‘000 ha)
- Kharif Rabi
- Grand
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer
total
Rice 114.5 0.4 114.9 - - - - 114.9
Sorghum - 0.9 0.9 - - - - 0.9
Maize 0.3 0.4 0.7 - - - - 0.7
Pigeonpea - 3.4 3.4 - - - - 3.4
Wheat - - - 118 0.066 118.1 118.1
Chickpea - - - 0.2 0.9 1.1 1.1
Pea - - - 4.3 0.003 4.3 4.3
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Total Irrigated Rainfed
Fruits - - -
Horticulture crops -
3
Vegetables
Potato 3.9 3.9
Onion 0.152 0.152
Others 6.8 6.6 0.2
Medicinal and Total Irrigated Rainfed
Aromatic crops
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 0.9 0.9
Bajra 0.03 0.03
Maize 0.4
Total fodder crop area 3.6 1.2 2.4
Grazing land
Sericulture etc
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Indigenous 414
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding)
Improved crossbred cattle (Cow & Buffalo only) 816
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) 13
Buffaloes 379
Goat 136
Sheep 129
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak, Horse, Monkey etc.) 10
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial
Backyard
4
Total 141.298
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Fisheries Department) Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized facilities (Ice
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake plants etc.)
Gill nets) & trap nets)
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000 tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department)
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department)
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years: 2004- 08)
Name of Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
crop residu
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
e as
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
fodder
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
Rice 292.8 2549 - - - - 292.8 2549 -
Sorghum 0.8 897 - - - - 0.8 897 -
Maize 0.8 1202 - - - - 0.8 1202 -
Pigeonpea 3.8 1132 - - - - 3.8 1132 -
Wheat - - 383.4 3246 - - 383.4 3246 -
Chick pea - - 1.2 1034 - - 1.2 1034 -
Pea - - 4.6 1068 - - 4.6 1068 -
5
1.12 Sowing window for
5 major field crops
(start and end of Rice Maize Pigeonpea Wheat Lentil
normal sowing
period)
Kharif- Rainfed 3rd week of June – 2nd week of June – 1st week of July -
3rd week of July 4th week of June 4th week of July
Kharif-Irrigated 4th week of June - 3rd week of June – -
2nd week of August 2nd week of July
Rabi- Rainfed Early rabi- September - 2nd week of October – 1st week of October –
October 2nd week of November 3rd week of October
Rabi-Irrigated - 2nd week of November -
4th week of December
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Flood √
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √ √
Cold wave √
Frost √
Sea water intrusion √
Pests and disease outbreak √
1.14 Include Digital maps Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
of the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
6
Annexure I
7
8
Annexure II
9
Annexure III
SOILS OF AZAMGARH DISTRICT (U.P.)
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded
2. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty soils
3. Deep, fine soils moderately saline and sodic associated with loamy
soils, slightly eroded
4. Deep, fine soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils
slightly saline and moderately sodic
5. Deep, silty soils to with loamy soils with moderate salinity and
sodicity and water logging
6. Deep, loamy soils with moderately water logging associated with
loamy soils with slight salinity/sodicty
7. Deep, silty loamy soils slightly saline and slightly sodic
8. Deep, silty loamy soils slightly eroded
9. Deep, silty soils with moderate salinity/sodicity associated with
loamy soils
Old Alluvial plain with river left out channels/Oxbows/point bars (1-
3%slope)
10. Deep, loamy soils
11.
Recent Alluvial Plain (1-3% slope)
12. Deep, loamy soils, slightly eroded associated with silty soils
10
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system system including variety Implementation
onset)
Delay by 2 weeks Sandy clay loam Rice Rice Raise Staggered rice nursery should be • Seed-drill under
soils grown at 15 days interval in small RKVY
1st week of July Transplanting/Direct areas at least two times • Supply of seed
seeding of Medium and through govt.
Short duration varieties of agencies ie.
Rice Such as NDR-97, NFSM,RKVY
NDR-359,NDR-80,NDR-
118, Baranideep etc.
Maize Maize-Prakash, Sartaj, Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Naveen, Tarun. maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
Pearl millet/ Pearlmillet-Pusa-3,Pusa-
duration varieties of Pigeonpea
Sorghum 322,and WCC-75
Sorghum-CSB-13,CSB-15
and CSH-16.
Pigeonpea No change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
11
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system system including variety Implementation
onset)
Delay by 4 weeks Sandy clay loam Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat • Direct seedling of short duration • Seed-drill under
soils varieties of Rice such as NDR-97, RKVY
3rd week of July Transplanting/Direct seeding of NDR-80, NDR-118, Saket-4 • Supply of seed
Medium and Short duration through govt.
varieties of Rice Such as NDR- • Raise Staggered rice nursery agencies ie.
97, NDR-359,NDR-80,NDR- should be grown at 15 days NFSM,RKVY
118, Baranideep, Govind,Saket- interval in small areas at least two
4, Ratna,IR-36 and Pant-12 etc. times
• Adopt SRI system of nursery
raising
• Transplanting of Rice (beyond 20th
July) with 3-4 seedlings/hill to
increasing the plant population of
60 hills/m2, instead of 50 hills/m2.
• Pruning of over aged Rice
seedlings for better establishment
and optimum plant stand
• Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea +
2.5 kg Potash as to increase the
drought tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Maize Maize-Prakash, Sartaj, Naveen, Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Tarun. maize with long duration varieties
of Pigeonpea
12
Sorghum / Pearl Sorghum-CSB-13,CSB-15 and Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
millet CSH-16. sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
duration varieties of pigeonpea
Pearlmillet-Pusa-3,Pusa-322,and
WCC-75 .
Pigeonpea No change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought Farming Cropping system including variety Implementation
(delayed onset) situation
Delay by 6 Sandy clay Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat Direct seeding of rice • Seed-drill under
weeks loam soils RKVY
Paddy: Short duration varieties of In case of late transplanting of • Supply of seed
1st week of paddy such as NDR-97, NDR- rice(beyond 20th July) planting through govt.
August 80,NDR-118, Pant Dhan-12 should should be dense by increasing agencies ie.
NFSM,RKVY
be transplanted/direct seeding. the number of seedlings/hill
from 2 to 3 to 3 to 4.
Adopt SRI system of nursery
raising
Weeding and interculture
Foliar spraying of 2.5 kg Urea +
2.5 kg Potash as to increase the
drought tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
13
Life saving irrigation in
transplanted rice
Maize Greengram/ Blackgram Intercropping/ mixed cropping
of Greengram/ Blackgram/
Greengram: T-44, Pant mung-1, maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet
Narendra mung-1 with long duration varieties of
pigeonpea
Blackgram : Narendra urd-1,Pant
urd-25
Sorghum / Pearl millet If monsoon further delays beyond
10th July, then in fallow/upland
composite varieties of sorghum
Pearlmillet and Blackgram,
Greengram and Sesame should be
sown
Sorghum- CSV-13, CSV-15 and
composite varieties CSH-14
Pearlmillet -Pusa-23,Pusa-322 and
WCC-75 and composite varieties
ICTP-8203, Raj-171
Pigeonpea Pigeonpea: Bahar Maize + Pigeonpea(Narendra
Arhar-1) 1:1
Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Pigeonpea+
Blackgram/Greengram (1:3)
14
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought situation Cropping system system including variety Implementation
(delayed onset)
Delay by 8 Sandy clay loam Rice-Wheat Preference should be given for Direct sowing • Seed-drill under
weeks soils sowing of Pearlmillet and Sesame RKVY
In case of late transplanting of • Supply of seed
Pearlmillet: Pusa 322, rice(beyond 20th July) planting through govt.
3rd week of 323(Hybrid) and WCC-75, Raj- should be dense by increasing the agencies ie.
August number of seedlings/hill from 2 to NFSM,RKVY
171(Composite)
3 to 3 to 4.
Sesame: - Type-4, Type-78,
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5
Type-12
kg Potash as to increase the
drought tolerance in nursery /
Greengram : T-44, Pant mung-1,
standing crops
Pant mung-2, Samrat, Malviya,
Janpriya, Malviya jyoti, Narendra
Life saving irrigation in
mung-1
transplanted rice
Maize Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Blackgram : Narendra urd-1,Pant
Greengram/
urd-25, Pant urd-19, Uttara,
Blackgram/maize/sorghum/
Type-9
Pearlmillet with long duration
Sorghum / Pearl Sowing of Fodder crops such as varieties of pigeonpea
millet sorghum, Pearlmillet, maize,
Blackgram, Greengram,
lobia,Clusterbean in mono or
double or triple cropping of Land preparation for sowing of
mixed fodders. early rabi crops like
potato,toria,lahi and mustard
If monsoon further delays beyond
10th July, then in fallow/upland
composite varieties of sorghum
CSV-13, CSV-15 Pearlmillet
15
ICTP-8203, Raj-171 and Hybrid
Blackgram, Greengram and
Sesamum should be sown
Pigeonpea September Pigeonpea -
Varieties Bahar, PDA-11, Pusa-9
should be done till Ist week of
September.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought (Normal situation Crop/cropping conservation measures Implementation
onset) system
Normal onset Sandy clay loam Rice Weeding at critical stages • Supply of inter
After seeding of rice if there is break
followed by 15-20 soils cultural
of monsoon by 7 to 10 days and if
days dry spell after Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea + implements
sowing leading to seedling mortality is observed then re- 2.5 kg Potash as to increase the through RKVY
poor germination/ sowing with the same variety drought tolerance in nursery / • Farm ponds
crop stand etc. standing crops through IWSM
Gap filling/transplanting in rice programme
Life saving irrigation • Pulse crop seeds
Using “Sanda” method, plant
supply through
polulation can be maintainted with Proper electricity NFSM
sufficient number of tillers in late monitoring/rostering system
should be ensured in area for
drought condition as to minimize the
regular supply of electricity for
production losses
pumping of water for life saving
irrigation
Maize Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to conserve the
soil moisture
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain
optimum plant population
16
Pigeonpea Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to conserve the
soil moisture
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain
optimum plant population
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Farming Normal Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought (long dry situation Crop/cropping conservation measures Implementation
spell, consecutive 2 system
weeks rainless
(>2.5 mm) period)
Sandy clay loam Rice Gap filling/transplanting in rice Weeding as to conserve the -
soils residual soil moisture
At vegetative stage Foliar spraying of 2% urea to boost
& up the growth Leaf mulching to conserve
Flowering stage the soil moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation from
the stored water during the
rainy season.
Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering system
should be ensured in area for
regular supply of electricity
for pumping of water for life
17
saving irrigation
Maize Thinning to maintain proper distance Foliar spraying of 2% MOP
between the plants. to increase the resistance to
Blackgram/
drought
Greengram
Frequent interculture
Pigeonpea
Leaf mulching to conserve
Earthing up in Pigeonpea the soil moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to boost Conservation furrow
up the growth
Life saving irrigation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Terminal Major Farming Normal Crop management Rabi Crop planning Remarks on
drought situation Crop/cropping Implementation
(Early withdrawal system
of monsoon)
Sandy clay loam Rice Alternate management of irrigation Better pulverization should
soils should be ensured for provide life be made for conservation of
saving irrigation
soil moisture following by
planking for sowing of early
rabi crops like toria and
Proper electricity monitoring/
potato etc..
rostering system should be ensured -
in area for regular supply of
electricity for pumping of water for
Toria variety- type-9, type-
life saving irrigation
36, PT-303, PT-30 and ageti
Rai should be sown in 1st
week of September while
Bhawani variety can be
18
sown in 2nd week of
September.
In fallow fields to sow
Ageti rai, potato varieties
like Kufri Ashoka, Kufri
Chandra mukhi and other
vegetable crops like
spinach,reddish coriander
etc.
Maize Harvesting of intercrop at Better pulverization should
physiological maturity (Maize, be made for conservation of
Blackgram and Greengram)
soil moisture following by
Blackgram/
planking for sowing of early
Greengram Harvesting of green cobs (maize)
rabi crops like toria and
and sell in market and remaining
potato etc..
portion will be used for fodder.
Toria variety- type-9, type-
36, PT-303, PT-30 and ageti
Rai should be sown in 1st
week of September while
Bhawani variety can be
sown in 2nd week of
September.
Pigeonpea
Earthing up of Pigeonpea
Life saving irrigation to pigeonpea
if possible.
19
2.1.2 Drought - Irrigated situation
Suggested Contingency measures
Condition Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
situation system system measures Implementation
Delayed release of water Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Lentil Short duration rice varieties- Community nursery Breeder’s seed
in canals due to low soils NDR 97, Ratna, Narendra 118, will be supplied
rainfall Narendra 97, Pant Dhan 12, Direct seeding in by BHU and
HUR 105, Induri Sambha, small beds. NDUAT,
HUR 2-1, HUR-3022 to be Faizabad.
grown under aerobic condition. Use of micro-
irrigation systems Seed drills RKVY
viz. sprinkler & sub- and supply of
surface irrigation. seeds NFSM
Breeders seed
Limited release of water Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Lentil Rice\ Maize \ Sorghum Community will be supplied
in canals due to low soils nursery, by BHU and
rainfall Grow short duration aerobic NDUAT,
rice such as NDR 97, NDR Direct seeding in Faizabad.
118, Govind, Vandana, small beds.
Varanideep, Susk Samrat , Seed drills RKVY
HUR 105 Use of micro- and supply of
irrigation systems seeds NFSM
Maize: Malviya hybrid viz. sprinkler & sub- Breeders seed
Makka-2, Naveen & Jaunpuri surface irrigation. will be supplied
Pearl millet : WCC 75, Raj by BHU and
171, Pusa 23 NDUAT,
Sorghum: CSH-16, CHS-9, Faizabad.
CHS-14, CSV-13 &CSV-15
should be grown on ridges for Seed drills under
fodder/grain purposes. RKVY and
20
Non release of water in Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Lentil Shift to only aerobic rice Direct seeding in supply of seeds
canals under delayed soils Or Rice may be replaced by small beds. through NFSM
onset of monsoon in pulses Breeder’s seed
catchment Greengram: Pant Mung -8, Use of micro- will be supplied
PDM-11, Samrat, Jyoti, Jagriti, irrigation systems by BHU and
viz. sprinkler & sub- NDUAT,
Janpriya, Jan Chetana & Jan
surface irrigation. Faizabad.
Kalyani
Blackgram: Type 9, Pant U 19, Seed drills under
Pant U 35, Narendra Urd 1 & RKVY and
Azad Urd-3 supply of through
seeds NFSM
Sesame :Type 4, T-12, T-13,
Breeder’s seed
Shekhar, GT1, TC 25 &TC
will be supplied
289 by BHU and
Lack of inflows into Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Lentil Sorghum\ Pearl millet Conservation NDAUT,
tanks due to insufficient soils tillage, Faizabad.
/delayed onset of
monsoon Sowing of Pearl Seed drills under
millet & Sorghum RKVY and
for grain purposes
supply of seeds
at 45 cm on ridges.
through NFSM
Foliar application
of 2% MOP
Use of mulches
(straw/dust).
Insufficient groundwater Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Lentil Rice should be replaced with Direct seeding in
recharge due to low soils pulses (green gram & black small beds.
rainfall gram), oilseeds (Sesame) in
Kharif and wheat by Chickpea .
& lentil in Rabi season.
21
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short span Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
leading to water logging
Rice Provide drainage Proper bunding, drain Harvesting at Shift to safer place
out excess water physiological maturity
Wheat Provide drainage Drain out excess water Harvesting at Shift to safer place
physiological maturity
Pigeonpea Provide drainage and Make inter-row furrow Harvesting at Shift to safer place
Practice of sowing on to Drain out excess physiological maturity
ridges water
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in a - - - -
short span2
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to
unseasonal rains
Rice, Wheat, Chickpea, Pigeonpea, Pearl Need based plant protection Need based plant Need based plant Safe storage against
millet (integrated pest and disease protection (integrated protection (integrated pest stored grain pest and
management) pest and disease and disease management diseases
management
22
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice • Provide surface drainage • Removal of excess Provide drainage Harvesting at physiological
• Re-sowing with short duration water • Prevent premature seed maturity
varieties • Drainage of excess germination Shift produce to safer place
• Raise community nursery in the water through drainage • Foliar spray of 5% urea Provision for buying /
village channel should be made. marketing of discoloured
grain at the earliest to
provide relief
Maize Provide drianage , creation of Divergent drain be made Divergent drain be made to
surface drains at appropriate places to collect runoff at collect runoff at suitable
to avoid water logging
suitable points either in points either in artificially
artificially created ponds created ponds or diverting to
Removal of silt from contour
or diverting to wells. wells.
staggered trenches
Divergent drain be made to collect
runoff at suitable points either in
artificially Created ponds or
diverting to wells.
Drainage of excess water through
drainage channel should be made.
Continuous submergence for more than 2 days2
23
Rice • Drainage of excess water through If crops fails due to water If crops fails due to water If water logging/floods occurs
drainage channel logging caused by excess logging caused by excess prior to September, then
• Transplanting of deep water rice – rainfall, then resowing by rainfall, then resowing by emphasis could be given for
Madhupur, Jalmagn, , Jalnidhi, the cultivation o early rabi
end week of August or end week of August or
Awarodhi, Mahsur-1, Jallahari, crops like Toria,Blackgram,
early maturing varieties of early maturing varieties of
Swarna, , Jal priya, Jal nidhi, Greengram or Sunflower.
crops should be taken crops should be taken
Mayank swarna sub-1should be
preferred.
If top dressing of urea is Drainage of excess water
not possible due to water through drainage channel
In low lying areas; stagnation/floods, then should be made.
foliar spray of 5% urea
1. Water stagnation upto 30-50 cm solution can be done. If top dressing of urea is
ht.- Mahsuri, Jal lahri, Swarna, not possible due to water
Sabha mahsuri stagnation/floods, then
2. Water stagnation upto 50-100 cm Drainage of excess water foliar spray of 5% urea
height – Chakya-69, Madhukar, through drainage channel solution can be done.
Jalpriya should be made.
3. >100 cm height – Jalnidhi, If water logging/floods
Jalmagna occurs prior to September,
4. Water logging- Awarodhi, then emphasis could be
Madhukar given for the cultivation of
Toria,Blackgram,
Greengram or Sunflower.
Drainage of excess water through
drainage channel should be made.
Sugarcane Planting of sugarcane varieties such In flood affected areas, If top dressing of urea is • Preference should be given for
as UP 9530 and Co.S 96436 could preference should be given not possible due to water planting of Autumn Sugarcane
be taken in flood affected areas for planting of Autumn stagnation/floods, then in the month of Oct so that
sugarcane in the month of foliar spray of 5% urea their grand growth completed
October sothat their grand solution can be done. to the maxi. Extent prior to
Planting of sugarcane on Raised growth completed to the floods.
bed should be preferred instead of maximum extent prior to
flat bed in flood affected areas of floods.
24
NEPZ.
If top dressing of urea is
not possible due to water
stagnation/floods, then
foliar spray of 5% urea
solution can be done.
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone
Suggested contingency measurer
Extreme event type
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice Provide watering • Provide light irrigation Irrigation interval should be -
Light and frequent irrigation during • Irrigation interval should be decreased
night decreased
Wheat - - Provide light irrigation Harvesting at
physiological
maturity
Chickpea - - Provide light irrigation Harvesting at
physiological
maturity
Pigeonpea • Mulching • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be -
decreased decreased
Cold wave
Wheat Provide light irrigation Provide light irrigation Provide light irrigation -
Pigeonpea Mulching Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting at
25
physiological
maturity
Frost
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival -
Pigeonpea • Grow as inter crop • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light irrigation for survival -
• Smoke generation to create heat • Smoke generation to create • Smoke generation to create heat
during night time heat during night time during night time
Hailstorm Not Applicable
Cyclone Not Applicable
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
Feed and fodder availability • Storage of straw and silage in silo pit
according to population of animal
Drinking water • Maintenance and inspection of Tubewells,
Hand pumps, Ponds, Tanks etc.
Health and disease management • Vaccination of animals against FMD, HS,
B.Q. and De warming
Floods
Feed and fodder availability • Increase the area of fodder • Provide safe place for the • Sowing of rabi fodder crops like
animals - Berseem, Lucerne, Oat and other rabi
crops
Drinking water • Crops according to population and their • Distribution of stored feed • Drain of infected stored water and
storage and fodders according to the supply of fresh water for drinking.
population
Health and disease management • Arrangement of clean drinking water • Provide neat & clean • Proper treatment of affected (animals
drinking water vaccination & Dewarming)
Cyclone
26
Feed and fodder availability • Arrangement of clean drinking water • Organize health camp -
regularly
Drinking water
Health and disease management
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environment • Shelter house/Farm house should not face • Proper availability of shelter, • Provide shelterbelts of good quality
management directly drinking water and feeds & materials
fodder as per need of the
animals
Health and disease management • Ensure the availability of drinking water and • Routine health check up by veterinary
as well as electrolytes doctors
s based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages
Suggested contingency measures with ongoing programs,
if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed ingredients
Drinking water • Deep tube well provide • Provide the drinking • Provide the drinking water
clean drinking water
Health and disease management • Vaccination against • Vaccination • Vaccination for
infectious diseases infectious diseases such as-
Ranikhet, infectious Coryza,
IBD, ILT
Floods
Shortage of feed ingredients • Inspection of established • Provide the drinking • Provide the drinking water
Tubewell & other water water
sources
27
Drinking water • Vaccination against • Vaccination • Vaccination for
infectious diseases infectious diseases such as-
Ranikhet, infectious Coryza,
IBD, ILT
Health and disease management
Cyclone
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environment management • Maintenance of
• Arrangement of proper
surrounds temp. and
shelter and cooler/heater
prevent the birds • Heat check up
to maintain the proper
from direct exposure
temp. of the shelter house
of heat/ cold waves
Health and disease management • Vaccination
• Vaccination • Vaccination • Availability of neat
& clean water
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine
Inland Arrange for alternative water Sell the produce at minimum
Lime Application
resources acceptable size to the consumer
(i) Shallow water depth due to
Stocking of Air breathing
insufficient rains/inflow
(ii) Changes in water quality Increased water temperature
(iii) Any other Decrease dissolve oxygen
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to Arrange for alternative water Minimum disturbance to the fish Maintain the pond properly by liming,
insufficient rains/inflow resources i.e. minimum fishing activities manuring and fertilization
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in
ponds / change in water quality
28
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine
Inland Manage the inlet, outlet structures along
Harvest the large size fish Protect the escape of fish
with pond land
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged
(ii) No.of houses damaged
(iii) Loss of stock
(iv) Changes in water quality
(v) Health and diseases
B. Aquaculture
(i) Inundation with flood water Make 2.5 m high bylonnet boundry Check for outlet to remain open Close outlet and open inlet
on the band of pond
(ii) Water contamination and changes Close inlet and divert water Treatment of water with Alum and
in water quality receiving channel KmnO
4
(iii) Health and diseases Feeding, liming, manuring and
fertilization of ponds
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, huts etc)
3. Cyclone / Tsunami
A. Capture
B. Aquaculture
(i) Overflow / flooding of ponds Stocking of fish sped for a period
of 1-2 month
(ii) Changes in water quality (fresh Liming Lime+alum Harvesting and selling fish seeds
water / brackish water ratio)
(iii) Health and diseases Lime+alum
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed, Netting of fish+KmnO application
4
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, shelters/huts etc)
4. Heat wave and cold wave Not Applicable
29
30