State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Bagpat District
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Northern Plain (And Central Highlands) Including Aravallis, Hot Semi-Arid Eco-Region (4.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Upper Gangatic Plain Zone(V)
Commission)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Western Plain Zone (UP-3)
List all the districts falling under the Muzaffarnagar, Meerut, Gaziyabad, G.B.Nagar and Bulandshahr.
NARP Zone*
(*>50% area falling in the zone)
Geographic coordinates of district
headquarters
Geographic coordinates of district Latitude Longitude Altitude
headquarters
290 0’ 48.205” N 770 18’42.532”E 222 Mt
Name and address of the concerned No
ZRS/ ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the K.V.K., New Khakra Tahsil Ke Pechhe Bagpat of S.V.P.U.A&T, Meerut.
district with address
Name and address of the nearest S.V.P. University Meerut / IARI New Delhi
Agromet Field Unit (AMFU, IMD) for
agro-advisories in the Zone
1
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number) ( specify week and (specify week and
month) month)
SW monsoon (June-Sep): 598.7 42 3rd week of June 2nd week of
September
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec): 31.5 12 3rd week of 2nd week of January
December
Winter (Jan- March) 66.2 15 - -
Summer (Apr-May) 23.8 7 - -
Annual 720.2 76 - -
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural Misc. land
statistics) use tree
crops
and
groves
Area (‘000 ha) 134.994 109.816 1.525 15.916 0.092 2.008 0.074 2.355 2.284 0.924
1. 4 Major Soils (common names like red Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total
sandy loam deep soils (etc.,)*
Sandy loam 74.22 67.58
Loam 24.43 22.25
Clay loam 6.95 6.33
Silt loam 4.513 4.11
Others (specify):
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity %
Net sown area 108.941 157.38%
Area sown more than once 63.010
2
Gross cropped area 172.826
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 105.493
Gross irrigated area 172.526
Rainfed area 3.448
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 2.792 2.6%
Tanks 0 _
Open wells 0.198 0.19%
Bore wells 102.503 96.58%
Lift irrigation schemes NIL _ _
Micro-irrigation 0.122 0.11
Other sources (please specify) 0
Total Irrigated Area 105.615
Pump sets
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the
(Data source: State/Central Ground Tehsils problem such as high levels of
water Department /Board) Block-6 arsenic, fluoride, saline etc)
Over exploited 1 - Not reported
Critical 2 - do
Semi- critical 2 - do
Safe 1 - do
Wastewater availability and use - - do
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
3
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures) (2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated Kharif Rabi
Grand
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer
total
Rice _ _ 3.646 _ _ 3.646 _ 3.646
Wheat _ _ _ _ _ 56.176 _ 56.176
Sugarcane _ _ _ _ _ 56.758 _ 56.758
Mustard _ _ _ _ 1.306 1.306 _ 1.306
Toria _ _ _ 2.000 _ 2.000 _ 2.000
Pigeonpea _ 0.123 0.123 _ _ _ _ 0.123
Horticulture crops - Fruits Area (‘000 ha)
Total Irrigated Rainfed
All Fruits Crops(Mango+Guava) 8.432 ha _ 8.732
Horticulture crops - Vegetables Total Irrigated Rainfed
Potato 0.503 ha 0.503 _
Other Vegetable Crops 32.753 ha 27.253 5.5
Medicinal and Aromatic crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Flowers(Marigold+Gladiolus) 0.160 0.160 _
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Eucalyptus 0.015 _ 0.015
Poplar 0.098 0.098 -
Eg., industrial pulpwood crops
etc.
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 47.135 21.246 25.888
Berseem 3.465 3.465 _
Pearl millet/Maize 1.216 0.562 0.654
Total fodder crop area 51.815 25.273 26.542
Grazing land 0.046
Sericulture etc
Others (specify)
4
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding) 9.325 70.370 79.695
Improved cattle NA NA NA
Crossbred cattle 8.641 33.844 42.485
1.9
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) 67.264 255.078 322.343
Descript Buffaloes 28.827 109.319 138.147
Goat 4.326 10.883 15.209
Sheep(India+Exotic) 1.099 3.016 4.115
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak etc.) 467.616
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial 01 4.000
Backyard 4.317+6.159=10.476
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Fisheries Department) facilities (Ice
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized plants etc.)
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake
Gill nets) & trap nets)
_ _ _ _ _
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
- - 673
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield Production (‘000 tons)
(t/ha)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - _
ii) Fresh water (Village tanks) (Data Source: Fisheries 667.78 ha _ _
Department)
Others
5
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops (2008-09)
1.11 Name of Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
crop residue
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
as
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
fodder
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Rice 9.906 2717 _ _ _ _ 9.906 0.27 6.182
Wheat _ _ 213.244 3796 _ _ 213.244 3796 262.290
Sugarcane _ _ _ _ _ _ 3233.684 56793 517.280
Mustard _ _ 1.443 1105 _ _ 1.443 1105 _
Toria _ _ 1.937 969 _ _ 1.937 969 _
Others
Major Horticultural crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
All Fruits - - - - - - 150.800 1727
All - - - - - - 371.800 1135
Vegetables
Potato - - - - - - 130.000 25845
Flowers - - - - - - 0.715 446.8
Others
1.12 Sowing window for 5
major field crops
Rice Wheat Sugarcane Mustard Toria
(start and end of normal
sowing period)
Kharif- Rainfed - - - - -
Kharif-Irrigated June-July - - - -
Rabi- Rainfed - Nov-Dec March Oct Sept
Rabi-Irrigated - Nov-Dec April-May Oct-Nov Sept
6
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought x √ x
Flood x X √
Cyclone x X √
Hail storm x X √
Heat wave x √ X
Cold wave x √ X
Frost x √ X
Sea water intrusion x x √
Pests and disease outbreak (specify)Pyrilla,Grass hopper, Heleothis, shoot √ x x
borer, white grub etc.
Others (specify) Fog √ x x
1.14 Include Digital maps Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
of the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: No
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
Soil map
Legend Description
1 Deep, loamy soils
2 Deep, loamy soils and silty soils
3 Deep, fine (moderately saline and sodic)
soils and loamy soils
4 Deep, loamy soils and loamy soils
9
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
2.1.2 Drought Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/ Change in Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf cropping systemg crop/cropping Implementation
systemh j
Delayed Upland sandy loam Rice (Basmati)- Replace rice with • Use short duration varieties • Seed through
release of soils Wheat maize or aerobic rice • Light irrigation with tube well KSSC and
water in Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, water NFSM
canals due to PRH 10 • Follow alternate wetting and • Adequate
low rainfall Maize: Kanchan, drying schedule of irrigation in supply of
Sweta, Navin, Surya rice electricity/dies
• Alternate Furrow irrigation el should be
• Mulching in sugarcane/maize ensured by the
Sorghum Pearl Govt.
(Fodder)/Maize- millet/Greengram/ agencies.
Blackgram - Potato/
Potato/ Wheat
Wheat
Pearl millet: WCC-
75, Raj-171, Pusa-23,
Pusa-322
Sugarcane + No change required
cucurbits –Ratoon-
Wheat
Lowland clay loam Rice-wheat Basmati rice –Wheat • Use short duration varieties • Seed through
soils Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, • Light irrigation with tube well KSSC and
PRH 10, Kanchan, water NFSM
Sweta, Navin, Surya • Follow alternate wetting and • Adequate
drying schedule of irrigation in supply of
rice electricity/dies
Sorghum( Fodder)- Pearl millet –Wheat el should be
10
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/ Change in Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf cropping systemg crop/cropping Implementation
systemh j
Wheat Pearl millet (fodder): • Alternate Furrow irrigation ensured by the
WCC-75, Raj-171, • Mulching in sugarcane government
Pusa-23, Pusa-322 agencies.
Sugarcane-Ratoon- No change required
Wheat
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping crop/cropping Implementationj
systemg systemh
Limited Upland sandy loam Rice (Basmati)- No change required • Light irrigation with tube well Adequate supply
release of soils Wheat water at critical stages only e.g of electricity
water in CRI, Tillering &.Flowering stage /diesel should be
Sorghum No change required
canals due to • Follow alternate wetting and ensured by the
(Fodder)/Maize-
low rainfall drying schedule of irrigation in Govt. agencies.
Potato/ Wheat
rice
Sugarcane + No change required • Alternate Furrow irrigation
cucurbits –Ratoon- • Mulching in sugarcane/maize
Wheat
Lowland clay loam Rice-wheat No change required • Light irrigation with tube well • Supply of inter
soils Sorghum( Fodder)- No change required water at critical stages only e.g cultural
CRI, Tillering &.Flowering stage implements
Wheat
• Follow alternate wetting and through RKV
Sugarcane-Ratoon- No change required
drying schedule of irrigation in • Adequate
Wheat
rice supply of
• Alternate Furrow irrigation electricity /
• Mulching in sugarcane diesel by the
Govt agencies.
Non release Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice • Limited irrigation • Seed through
of water in Upland tube well Sorghum /Maize Pearl millet • Alternate Furrow irrigation KSSC and
canals under irrigated canal sandy /Pigeonpea • Drip irrigation NFSM
delayed onset loam soil /Blackgram • Mulching • Supply of inter
of monsoon Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane cultural
11
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping crop/cropping Implementationj
systemg systemh
in catchment implements
through RKVY
•
Lowland tube well Rice Pearl millet / • Limited irrigation • Seed through
irrigated canal clay Blackgram / • Alternate Furrow irrigation KSSC and
loam soil Greengram • Drip irrigation NFSM
Sorghum ( Fodder) Pearl millet /Sorghum • Mulching • Harvesting and
( Fodder) • Alternate furrow irrigation Threshing
Sugarcane + Sugarcane implements
cucurbits through RKVY
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping systemh Agronomic Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping measuresi Implementationj
systemg
Lack of 1) Farming situation: Cropping system 1: NA NA NA
inflows into
tanks due to
insufficient
/delayed
onset of
monsoon
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping systemh measuresi Implementationj
systemg
Insufficient Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Arabic Rice /Vegetable • Limited • Seed through
groundwater irrigated canal sandy (Tomato, Brinjal, cucrbits etc) irrigation KSSC and NFSM
recharge due loam soil Sorghum/Maize Bajara /Arhar/Urd • Alternate • Harvesting and
to low Sugarcane + Sugarcane Furrow threshing
rainfall irrigation implements
Cucurbits
• Drip irrigation through RKVY
• Mulching
Lowland tube well Rice Pearl millet /Blackgram / • Limited • Seed through
12
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping systemh Agronomic Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping measuresi Implementationj
systemg
irrigated canal clay Greengram irrigation KSSC and NFSM
loam soil Sorghum ( Fodder) Pearl millet /Sorghum ( Fodder) • Alternate • Micro/drip/sprinkle
Sugarcane + Sugarcane Furrow r irrigation under
irrigation govt. schemes
Cucurbits
• Drip irrigation • Supply of inter
• Mulching cultural implements
• Alternate furrow through RKVY
irrigation
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short Vegetative stagek Flowering Crop maturity stagem Post harvestn
span leading to water logging stagel
Maize + Blackgram / Greengram Provide drainage Provide Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place &
/Cucurbits drainage Harvesting at physiological dispose off produce as early
maturity stage as possible
Sugarcane Provide drainage NA Supply to sugar mills
Drain out excess water and /crusher as early as possible
harvest the lodged crop as early or shift to safer place and
as possible cover the cane with trash
materials
Blackgram / Greengram Provide drainage Provide Drain out excess water.
Safe storage against storage
drainage Harvesting at physiological
maturity stage. pest and disease
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Provide Picking of vegetables at Shift to safer place &
drainage physiological maturity stage dispose of produce as early
as possible
Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place &
13
drainage Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as early
maturity stage and picking of as possible
cucurbits crop.
Brinjal Provide drainage Provide Shift to safer place &
drainage dispose of produce as early
Picking at physiological as possible
maturity stage
Tomato Provide Shift to safer place &
drainage dispose of produce as early
Picking at physiological as possible
Provide drainage maturity stage
Mango - Spray of 2% urea + -
- Carbendazim 0.02% solution
Guava - Spray of 2% urea +
- Carbendazim 0.02% solution -
Heavy rainfall with high speed
winds in a short span2
NA Supply to sugar mills
Sugarcane Drain out excess water and /crusher as early as possible
• Earthing up harvest the lodged crop as early or shift to safer place and
• Tying as possible cover the cane with trash
materials
Maize/Sorghum Provide Shift to safer place &
drainage Drain out excess water & dispose of produce as early
Provide drainage Use Wind Harvesting at physiological as possible
breaks maturity stage
Blackgram / Greengram Provide Shift to safer place &
drainage Drain out excess water & dispose of produce as early
• Provide drainage Use Wind Harvesting at physiological as possible
breaks maturity stage
Rice basmati Provide Shift to safer place &
drainage Drain out excess water & dispose of produce as early
Provide drainage Harvesting at physiological as possible
maturity stage
Pigeonpea Provide Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place &
• Provide drainage drainage Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as early
14
• Sowing on raised maturity stage as possible
bed
Horticulture
Okra • Provide drainage Provide Shift to safer place &
• Sowing on raised drainage Drain out Harvesting at dispose of produce as early
bed physiological maturity stage as possible
Brinjal • Provide drainage Provide Shift to safer place &
• Sowing on raised drainage Drain out Harvesting at physio- dispose of produce as early
bed logical maturity stage as possible
Tomato Provide Shift to safer place &
• Provide drainage drainage dispose of produce as early
• Sowing on raised Use Wind Drain out Harvesting at physio- as possible
bed breaks logical maturity stage
• Stacking Stacking Stacking
Cauliflower • Provide drainage Provide Shift to safer place &
• Sowing on raised drainage Drain out Harvesting at physio- dispose of produce as early
bed logical maturity stage as possible
Cucurbits • Provide drainage Provide
• Sowing on raised drainage Drain out Harvesting at physio- Shift to safer place &
bed logical maturity stage dispose of produce as early
as possible
Mango Use of NAA Use of NAA spray
spray
Use Wind breaks -
Guava Use of NAA Use of NAA spray
spray
Use Wind breaks -
Outbreak of pests and diseases due
to unseasonal rains
Rice basmati Need based plant Need based Do not use strong pesticide at Shift to safer place &
15
Sugarcane protection IPDM for plant protection maturity stage dispose of produce as early
Sorghum( fodder)
Rice/pluses IPDM for as possible
Rice/pluses
Blackgram / Greengram
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra Need based plant Need based Shift to safer place &
Do not use strong pesticide at
protection IPDM for plant protection dispose of produce as early
Brinjal maturity stage
Rice/pluses IPDM for as possible
Tomato
Rice/pluses
Cucurbits
Cauliflower
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice basmati • Re sowing of nursery Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
• Direct sowing of rice
early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised
bed
Sugarcane Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
Direct sowing Provide drainage
early as possible
Sorghum ( fodder) Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
Direct sowing Provide drainage
early as possible
Blackgram / Greengram Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
Direct sowing Provide drainage
early as possible
Pigeonpea Direct sowing Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
16
early as possible
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
• Sowing of nursery on raised Provide drainage
early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
• Sowing of nursery on raised Provide drainage
early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
• Sowing of nursery on raised Provide drainage
early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Continuous Shift to safer place &
submergence dispose of produce as
for more than 2 days2 early as possible
• Re sowing of nursery Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
Rice • Direct sowing of rice
early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised
bed
Horticulture Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
early as possible
Okra • Re sowing of nursery Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
• Sowing of nursery on raised Provide drainage
early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
• Sowing of nursery on raised
early as possible
bed
17
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
• Sowing of nursery on raised Provide drainage
early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Mango • Re sowing of nursery Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as
• Sowing of nursery on raised Provide drainage
early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Sea water intrusion3 NA NA NA NA
Crop1
Crop2
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone/Fog
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measurer
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wavep
• Re sowing of nursery Irrigation interval should be Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent
Rice basmati • Light and frequent irrigation decreased decreased irrigation
during night
• Mulching Irrigation interval should be Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent
Sugarcane decreased decreased irrigation
• Re sowing Irrigation interval should be Irrigation interval should be Make silage
Sorghum ( fodder) decreased decreased
• Re sowing Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Pod picking
Blackgram / • Mulching
Greengram
Pigeonpea • Re sowing Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Pod picking
• Mulching
18
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching of nursery beds
• Light irrigation during night
Mango • Spray of water Spray of water Spray of water -
Guava • Spray of water Spray of water Spray of water -
Cold waveq
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation
Sugarcane Mulching Light irrigation for survival -- Harvesting of cane
Horticulture
Tomato Grow some inter crop Light Sprinkler irrigation Light Sprinkler irrigation Harvesting of fruits
Pea Grow some inter crop Light Sprinkler irrigation Light Sprinkler irrigation Harvesting of fruits
Potato Grow some inter crop Light Sprinkler irrigation -- Harvesting
Frost
Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Harvesting of cane
Sugarcane
Pigeonpea Grow as inter crop Light irrigation Light irrigation Smoke at night
Smoke at night Smoke at night Smoke at night
Horticulture
19
Potato • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for Harvesting
survival survival survival
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Tomato • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for De halming
survival survival survival
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Pea • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for Harvesting
survival survival survival
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Mango • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation • Irrigation &Smoking --
night &Smoking during night during night
Guava • Irrigation &Smoking • Irrigation • Irrigation &Smoking Harvesting
during night &Smoking during night during night
Hailstorm
Crop1:All the crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Horticulture
Crop1:All the Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Vegetable crops
• Use anti hail net • Use anti hail net • Use anti hail net • Harvest the
Crop2:All the Fruit • Spray of fungicide • Spray of fungicide • Spray of fungicide with damaged fruits
crops with 2% urea solution with 2% urea 2% urea solution • Spray of
solution fungicide with 2%
urea solution
Fog
Sugarcane
Pigeonpea
Wheat
Horticulture
Potato
Cauliflower
Tomato
20
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
• Fodder crop Insurance
• Making of feed blocks • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
• Encourage farmers to allocate some trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for • Cultivation of fast growing
lands for cultivating perennial fodder small ruminant. green fodder crops.
(Napier grass, Subabul), specially on • Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, • Development of drought
bunds and wasteland feed blocks & mixture etc. resistance fodder.
Feed and fodder • Establishing fodder banks, encouraging • Migration of herd /flock to other places. • Increase the no. of Fodder
availability fodder crops in irrigated area • Establishment of communication and Banks for future use.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder. linkage with other state agencies.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder
availability and requirement should be
updated by the concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of
drought resistant crops and their
varieties of fodder crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler
irrigation system.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long
term storage of feed and fodder.
• Using preserved water in the tanks for
• Preserving water in the pond/tank for
drinking • Recharge of well/
drinking purpose.
Drinking water • Available ground water should be used Tanks etc.
• Excavation of bore well/creation of
for drinking on priority basis.
tanks or ponds.
• De-silting of village ponds on regular
basis and adopt water harvesting
21
techniques through water shed
approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube
well water during lean period.
• Availing insurance
benefits.
• Farmers should be encouraged to avail • Conduction mass animal health camps • Followed standard
Livestock insurance and treating the effected animals. Livestock management
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners regarding • Mass campaigning though different practices.
management natural calamities. media regarding possible outbreak of • Proper health care &
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines diseases and their management. treatment.
and vaccines.
• Vaccination
Floods
• Fodder crop Insurance
• Making of feed blocks • Utilizing fodder from perennial
• Encourage farmers to allocate some tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. • Availing crop insurance
lands for cultivating perennial fodder • Use of feed mixture/block hay etc • Cultivation of fast growing
(Napier grass, Subabul), specially on • Migration of flock /herds green fodder crops
bunds and wasteland
• Establishment of communication and
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging
linkage with other state agencies
fodder crops.
Feed and fodder • Making silage or hay of excess fodder
availability
and that should be stored on up land.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder
availability and requirement should be
updated by the concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of
crops and their varieties of fodder crops
for water logged conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long
term storage of feed and fodder.
22
• Making suitable provision for safe
Drinking water drinking surface water including • Contaminated flood water should not be
excavation of bore well/hand pump • Open sources of drinking
used for drinking.
(India mark—II) at community level. water (tank/well) should
• Make farmers aware not to use be further treated with
potassium per magnate.
contaminated/ flood water for drinking
purpose.
• Culling sick animals
Health and disease • Live stock Insurance • Conduction mass animal health camp and • Availing insurance
management • Training to livestock owners regarding treating the effected animals. benefits.
natural calamities. • Training to livestock owners regarding • Culling unproductive
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines natural calamities. livestock
and vaccines. • Establishment of Co-ordination with • Proper disposal of corpse
• Vaccination other Agencies. of dead bodies to prevent
• • Use of mass media to spread expat advice the spread of contagious
• . diseases.
Cyclone
N.A N.A N.A N.A
Heat wave and cold
wave
Shelter/environment • Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in • Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins/ rags in Repair and maintenance of
management additional facilities
the animal sheds to protect against direct
the animal shed
entry of hot/ cold waves
• Create adequate sources for additional
• Provide proper bedding to prevent from
supply of water to protect the animals
from heat waves.
cold and proper ventilation to prevent
from heat.
• Establishment of modern shelter
• Provide drinking water to animal
sheds.
frequently during heat wave
• As far as possible grow shade trees
• Watch the forecast of weather
such as Neem, Pilkhan, Karanj etc
department.
near the animal sheds.
• Make provision for adequate no. of • As for as possible the animal should be
fans/coolers /heaters according to the allowed to wallow in pounds/ canals/
23
situation, if possible river or give bath once or twice in a day
during heat waves
• Proper after care of
animals.
• Insure the animals • Organize village level animal health
• Availing insurance
camps
• Training to livestock owners/ para-vets benefits.
Health and disease regarding preventive measure against • Consult veterinary officer immediately if
• Proper disposal of corpse
management extreme weather conditions any adverse symptoms are noticed
of dead bodies to prevent
• Veterinary preparedness with • Use of ITKs for food supplements the spread of contagious
medicines and vaccines etc. diseases.
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold
based on forewarning wherever available
24
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/
linkages with
ongoing
programs, if
Suggested contingency measures any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
• Use of feed concentrates/
• Making and storage of feed mixture/blocks etc
Shortage of feed • Availing insurance
concentrates
ingredients • Establishment of • Increase the no. of feed banks
• Awareness regarding communication with other state
for future use
traditional feed banks. agencies.
• Feed requirement data should • Use of locally available
be generated feed recourses.
• Prepare the feed requirement • Import the feed recourse
data base of poultry farm. form other states.
• Store the feed ingredients
• Making extra facility for
Drinking water • Frequent supply of drinking water
drinking water.
• Repair & maintenance of
water resources
• Treatment of affected poultry
birds
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with • Culling of flock
management medicines and vaccines. • Availing insurance benefits
• Vaccination • Proper disposal of corpse of
• Training to poultry dead bodies to prevent the
pared of contagious diseases
Growers regarding natural
calamities.
Floods
25
Shortage of feed • Sufficient quantity of feed • Use of stored feed in balanced • Cleaning of feed store &
ingredients ingredients should be stored form
repair if any.
• Prevent the feed from moisture. • Moist feed should be dried
&treated as per requirement
• Repair, maintenance
and cleaning of water
recourse
• Make provision of ground • Use only Ground water obtained • Sanitation of open
Drinking water water for drinking from India Mrka II or Tube well Wells
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with • Availing insurance benefits.
management medicines and vaccines • Migration of flock if required • Culling of unproductive
• Vaccination • Treatment flock
Cyclone NA NA NA
• Storage and making of feed
Shortage of feed concentrates • Establishment of communication • Repair and maintenance of
ingredients • Proper feed requirement data with other state agencies feed store
base • Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other areas
Drinking water • Make provision of ground • Use only Ground water obtained • Repair and maintenance of
water for drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell water recourse
Health and disease • Training to poultry growers • Culling of flock
management • Treatment of injured poultry birds.
regarding natural calamities. • Availing insurance benefits.
• Veterinary preparedness with • Proper disposal of corpse of
medicines and vaccines.
dead bodies to prevent the
pared of contagious diseases.
Heat wave and
cold wave
Shelter/environme • Making sufficient provision of • Keep the birds in appropriate shelter • Making of modern shelter
nt management shelter to protect live stock • Provide proper bedding to prevent sheds
26
from heat and cold waves from cold and proper ventilated to • Increase the plantation of
• Establishment of alternate prevent from heat trees
resource for water supply. • Provide drinking water to birds
• Modern shelter sheds. frequently.
• Adopted proper management
practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
• Insurance • Provide proper treatment as per • Availing insurance benefits •
requirement
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with • Culling of unproductive flock
management • Treatment of injured poultry
medicines and vaccines • Proper disposal of corpse of
• Training to poultry growers dead bodies to prevent the
regarding natural calamities pared of contagious diseases
based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine _ _ _
Inland
(i) Shallow water depth due to Adopt appropriate measures to
insufficient rains/inflow reduce water seepage or Harvest the crop partially Re stock
infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Add oxy-flow to improve
• Regular observation to check the oxygen • Maintain appropriate level of
water quality and remove the • Churning of pond water water if possible
• Check the water quality and
pollutants if any.
remove the pollutants if any.
(iii) Any other _ _ _
27
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Ensure the Oxygen
insufficient rains/inflow • Adopt appropriate measures to availability into ponds for the
reduce water seepage or survival of fish
infiltration from ponds • Avoid any kind of water • Maintain appropriate level of
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution water in ponds
pollution • Add oxy-flow to improve • Check the water quality and
and maintain water pH oxygen into ponds. remove the pollutants if any.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in • Add fresh water into pond for
ponds / change in water quality • Add some fresh water from other • Add oxy-flow to improve life saving and to reduce salt
source like cannel etc oxygen into ponds. load
• Churning of pond water • Maintain appropriate level of
• Add fresh water into pond water in ponds
for life saving and to reduce • Check the water quality and
salt load remove the pollutants if any.
_
(iii) Any other
_ --
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
Close supervision of flood
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged Boats, nets etc should be taken out condition Damaged boat or nets should be
from water bodies repaired
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _
Repair the damaged house.
Sanitation and proper disposal of
(iii) Loss of stock _ _
corpse
(iv) Changes in water quality -- --
Increase the height of bunds.
(v) Health and diseases -- --
Treatment if possible
B. Aquaculture
(i) Inundation with flood • Repair the bunds to prevent • Avoid inflow of flood water • Repair the damaged bunds
water the inflow of water from outside. • Check water quality
28
• If inflow water is not polluted • If inflow water is not polluted • Change the water if it is
then place the net at inlet and that can be permitted to flow polluted
outlet through net placed at inlet
• Raise the height of bunds and outlet of pond.
• Plan a proper drainage system • Fencing of net required in
case of overflow to avoid the
at farm
migration of fish
• Plantation of soil binding
plants at bund
• Maintain appropriate level of
(ii) Water contamination and • Liming @300 kg/ha • Stop inflow of contaminated water in ponds
changes in water quality water • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any.
• Diagnostic measures and
(iii) Health and diseases • Liming @300 kg/ha
provide appropriate • Liming and medication as per
• Vaccination medicines
requirement
• Use Cifex to control ulcerative
syndromes
• Immediately remove the dead
• Marketable stock should be sold
fishes from ponds and do
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs
sanitation • After sanitation add new stock
(feed, chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Damageable infrastructures • Do not supply Electric in • Repair and service the damage
aerators, huts etc) should be secured floodéd area infrastructure
(vi) Any other
3. Cyclone / Tsunami NA NA NA
A. Capture -- -- --
Marine
(i) Average compensation paid
due to loss of fishermen lives
(ii) Avg. no. of boats /
nets/damaged
(iii) Avg. no. of houses damaged
29
Inland -- -- --
B. Aquaculture -- -- --
(i) Overflow / flooding of ponds
(ii) Changes in water quality
(fresh water / brackish water ratio)
(iii) Health and diseases
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, shelters/huts etc)
(vi) Any other
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
B. Aquaculture
• Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of
water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m water in ponds ie. 1.75m in water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m
(i) Changes in pond
deep ponds 2m deep ponds deep ponds
environment (water quality) • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any
i) Health and Disease • Medication as per • Remove the dead fishes from
management • Liming@300kg/ha requirement
ponds and add new stocks to
compensate
• the production
based on forewarning wherever available
30