State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Bahraich/Sravasti
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Eastern Plain, Hot Subhumid (moist) Eco-Region (13.2)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Upper Gangetic Plain Region (V)
Commission)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Central Plain Zone (UP-6)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Barabanki,Ambedkarnagar,Faizabad,Sultanpur,Azamgarh,Mau,Jaunpur,Varanasi, Gazipur, Ballia,
Zone*(*>50% area falling in the zone) Bhadohi
Geographic coordinates of district Latitude Longitude Altitude
headquarters 28o24’ N 81o38’ E 126 m
Name and address of the concerned Directorate of Research, SAU, Kumarganj, Faizabad
ZRS/ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district KVK, Bahraich
with address
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number) ( specify week and month) (specify week and
month)
SW monsoon (June-Sep) 896.1 40 3rd week of June 1st week of October
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec) 90.0 4
Winter (Jan- Feb) 76.0 4
Summer (March-May) 85.9 6
Annual 1148.0 54
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the Area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
district agricultural Misc. tree land
use crops and
groves
(‘000 ha) 486 326.1 67.9 56.9 0.5 2.14 6.01 3.6 17.1 5.8
1. 4 Major Soils (common names like red Area Percent (%) of total Geographical area
sandy loam deep soils (etc.,)* (‘000 ha)
Tarai Sandy soils - 23.27
Tarai Clay loams - 25.30
Plain Sandy clay soils - 23.90
Plain Clay loam soils - 8.60
Plain Sandy loam soils - 8.72
Plain loam soils - 10.21
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity(% )
Net sown area 326.1
Area sown more than once 206.7 172.41
Gross cropped area 532.8
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area -
Gross irrigated area -
Rainfed area -
2
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 64.01 19.3
Tanks 0.004
Open wells 0.1
Bore wells 17.5 174.05 47.2
Lift irrigation schemes
Micro-irrigation
Other sources
Total Irrigated Area 368.329
Pump sets 135 36.6
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils problem such as high levels of
Department /Board) arsenic, fluoride, saline etc)
Over exploited
Critical
Semi- critical
Safe
Wastewater availability and use
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures of 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops cultivated Area (‘000 ha)
Kharif Rabi
Grand
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer
total
Rice 162.6 0.2 162.8 162.8
Sorghum 0.4 0.4 0.4
Maize 8.8 0.3 9.2 9.2
Pigeon pea 4.4 4.4 4.4
3
Wheat 155.3 0.06 155.36 155.36
Chickpea 260 260 260
Lentil 478.3 0.003 478.3 478.3
Horticulture crops - Fruits Area (‘000 ha)
Total Irrigated Rainfed
Horticulture crops - Vegetables Total Irrigated Rainfed
Potato 2.2 2.2
Onion 0.1 0.1
Others 5.5 5.3 0.2
Medicinal and Total Irrigated Rainfed
Aromatic crops
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 0.11
Bajra 1.06
Maize 87.9
Total fodder crop area 3.6 1.2 2.4
Grazing land
Sericulture etc
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Indigenous - - 468.44
Non descriptive Cattle 3.10
(local low yielding)
Improved crossbred cattle (Cow & Buffalo only) 296.97
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) 1.49
4
Buffaloes 173.07
Goat 350.41
Sheep 15.73
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak, Horse, Monkey etc.) 502.89
Commercial dairy farms (Number) - -
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial 379 216.10
Backyard 167 13.15
2.0 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Fisheries Department) facilities (Ice
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized
plants etc.)
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake &
Gill nets) trap nets)
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
- - -
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000 tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - -
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department) - - -
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years: 2004-08)
1.11 Name of Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
5
crop Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity residue
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) as
fodder
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
Rice 307.1 18.8 - - - - 307.1 18.8
Sorghum 120.1 10.9 - - - - 120.1 10.9
Maize 100.6 11.4 - - - - 100.6 11.4
Pigeon pea 341.6 7.8 - - - - 341.6 7.8
Wheat - - 374.7 24.4 - - 374.7 24.4
Pea - - 181.8 11.6 - - 181.8 11.6
Lentil - - 316.6 6.6 - - 316.6 6.6
Mustard - - 73.6 7.7 - - 73.6 7.7
Potato - - 471.9 224.8 - - 471.9 224.8
1.12 Sowing window for
5 major field crops
Rice Maize Pigeonpea Wheat Lentil
(start and end of normal
sowing period)
Kharif- Rainfed 3rd week of June – 2nd week of June – 1st week of July - - -
3rd week of July 4th week of June 4th week of July
Kharif-Irrigated 4th week of June – 3rd week of June – - - -
2nd week of August 3rd week of July
Rabi- Rainfed - - Early rabi- 3rd week of October – 1st week of October –
September - 3rd week of November 4th week of October
October
Rabi-Irrigated - - - 3rd week of November –
4th week of December
6
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Flood √
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √
Cold wave √
Frost √
Sea water intrusion √
Pests and disease outbreak √
1.14 Include Digital maps of the district for Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
9
Annexure II
10
Annexure III
SOILS OF BAHRAICH DISTRICT (U.P.)
Piedmont Plains (1-3% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded
2. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
3. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded .
4. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty soils .
5. Deep, fine soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils .
6. Deep, silty soils associated with loamy soils slightly eroded .
7. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty soils slightly
saline/sodic and moderately sodic.
8. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded.
9. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded associated with fine soils .
Old Alluvial plain with river left out channels/Oxbows/point bars (1-3%slope)
10. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with stratified loamy soils
slightly eroded
Recent Alluvial Plain (1-3% slope)
11. Deep, loamy soils with slight flooding .
Active Flood Plain (1-3% slope)
12. Deep, sandy soils with moderate flooding associated with stratified loamy soils
and slight flooding .
13. Deep, stratified loamy soils, with severe flooding associated with loamy soils
with moderate flooding .
11
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system cropping system Implementation
onset) including variety
Delay by 2 weeks Deep clay loam Rice Rice Raise Staggered rice nursery should be
soils grown at 15 days interval in small areas
1st week of July Transplanting/Direct at least two times
seeding of Medium
and Short duration
varieties of Rice
Such as NDR-97,
NDR-359,NDR-
80,NDR-118,
Baranideep etc.
Maize Maize-Prakash, Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Sartaj, Naveen, maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
Tarun. duration varieties of Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea Pigeonpea Sowing on raised beds,
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system system including variety Implementation
onset)
12
Delay by 4 weeks Deep clay loam Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat • Direct seedling of short • Seed-drill under
soils duration varieties of Rice RKVY
3rd week of July Transplanting/Direct seeding such as NDR-97, NDR-80, • Supply of seed
of Medium and Short NDR-118, Saket-4 through govt.
duration varieties of Rice agencies ie.
Such as NDR-97, NDR- • Raise Staggered rice nursery NFSM,RKVY
359,NDR-80,NDR-118, should be grown at 15 days
Baranideep, Govind,Saket-4, interval in small areas at least
Ratna,IR-36 and Pant-12 etc. two times
• Adopt SRI system of nursery
raising
• Transplanting of Rice
(beyond 20th July) with 3-4
seedlings/hill to increasing
the plant population of 60
hills/m2, instead of 50
hills/m2.
• Pruning of over aged Rice
seedlings for better
establishment and optimum
plant stand
• Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Maize Maize-Prakash, Sartaj, Intercropping/ mixed
Naveen, Tarun. cropping of maize with long
duration varieties of
Pigeonpea
13
Pigeonpea No change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system system including variety Implementation
onset)
Delay by 6 weeks Deep clay loam Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat Direct seeding of rice • Seed-drill under
1st week of soils RKVY
August Paddy: Short duration In case of late transplanting • Supply of seed
varieties of paddy such as of rice(beyond 20th July) through govt.
NDR-97, NDR-80,NDR-118, planting should be dense by agencies ie.
NFSM,RKVY
Pant Dhan-12 should be increasing the number of
transplanted/direct seeding. seedlings/hill from 2 to 3 to 3
to 4.
Adopt SRI system of nursery
raising
Weeding and interculture
Foliar spraying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation in
transplanted rice
14
Maize Greengram/ Blackgram Intercropping/ mixed
cropping of Greengram/
Greengram: T-44, Pant Blackgram/
mung-1, Narendra mung-1 maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet
with long duration varieties
Blackgram : Narendra urd- of pigeonpea
1,Pant urd-25
Sorghum+green gram(2:2)
Pigeonpea Pigeonpea: Bahar Maize (Tipekhiya) in
Pigeonpea(Narendra Arhar-
1) crop in 1:1 row ratio
Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Pigeonpea+
Blackgram/Greengram (1:3)
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system system including variety Implementation
onset)
15
Delay by 8 weeks Deep clay loam Rice-Wheat Preference should be given Direct sowing • Seed-drill under
3rd week of soils for sowing of Pearlmillet and RKVY
August Sesame In case of late transplanting • Supply of seed
of rice(beyond 20th July) through govt.
Pearlmillet: Pusa 322, planting should be dense agencies ie.
by increasing the number NFSM,RKVY
323(Hybrid) and WCC-75,
of seedlings/hill from 2 to
Raj-171(Composite)
3 to 3 to 4.
Sesame: - Type-4, Type-78,
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Type-12
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
Greengram : T-44, Pant
tolerance in nursery /
mung-1, Pant mung-2,
standing crops
Samrat, Malviya, Janpriya,
Malviya jyoti, Narendra
Life saving irrigation in
mung-1
transplanted rice
Maize Intercropping/ mixed
Blackgram : Narendra urd-
cropping of Greengram/
1,Pant urd-25, Pant urd-19,
Blackgram/maize/sorghum/
Uttara, Type-9
Pearlmillet with long
duration varieties of
pigeonpea
Land preparation for
sowing of early rabi crops
like potato,toria,lahi and
mustard
Pigeonpea September Pigeonpea -
Varieties Bahar, PDA-11,
16
Pusa-9 should be done till Ist
week of September.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Soil nutrient &
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
drought (Normal Crop management moisture conservation
situation system Implementation
onset) measures
Normal onset Deep clay loam Rice After seeding of rice if there is Weeding at critical • Supply of inter
followed by 15-20 soils break of monsoon by 7 to 10 stages cultural
days dry spell after days and if seedling mortality is implements
sowing leading to Foliar praying of 2.5 kg through RKVY
observed then re-sowing with the
poor germination/ Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as • Farm ponds
same variety
crop stand etc. to increase the drought through IWSM
tolerance in nursery / programme
Gap filling/transplanting in rice
standing crops • Pulse crop seeds
supply through
Using “Sanda” method, plant
Life saving irrigation NFSM
polulation can be maintainted
with sufficient number of tillers Proper electricity
in late drought condition as to monitoring/rostering
minimize the production losses system should be
ensured in area for
regular supply of
electricity for pumping
of water for life saving
irrigation
Maize Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain moisture
optimum plant population
17
Pigeonpea Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain moisture
optimum plant population
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season
drought (long dry Soil nutrient &
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
spell, consecutive 2 Crop managementc moisture conservation
situationa systemb Implementatione
weeks rainless measuresd
(>2.5 mm) period)
At vegetative stage Deep clay loam Rice Gap filling/transplanting in rice Weeding as to conserve
soils the residual soil
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to moisture
boost up the growth
Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as
to increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation
from the stored water
during the rainy season.
Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering
system should be
ensured in area for
18
regular supply of
electricity for pumping
of water for life saving
irrigation
Maize Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2%
Blackgram/ Greengram distance between the plants. MOP to increase the
resistance to drought
Pigeonpea
Frequent interculture
Leaf mulching to
Earthing up in Pigeonpea conserve the soil
moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to
boost up the growth Conservation furrow
Life saving irrigation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Soil nutrient &
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
drought (long dry Crop management moisture conservation
situation system Implementation
spell) measures
At flowering/ Deep clay loam Rice Foliar spraying of 2% urea to Weeding as to conserve
fruiting stage soils boost up the growth the residual soil
moisture
Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as
19
to increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation
from the stored water
during the rainy season.
Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering
system should be
ensured in area for
regular supply of
electricity for pumping
of water for life saving
irrigation
Maize Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2%
Blackgram/ Greengram distance between the plants. MOP to increase the
resistance to drought
Pigeonpea Frequent interculture
Leaf mulching to
Earthing up in Pigeonpea conserve the soil
moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to
boost up the growth Conservation furrow
Life saving irrigation
20
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Terminal
drought Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
Crop management Rabi Crop planning
(Early withdrawal situation system Implementation
of monsoon)
Deep clay loam Rice Alternate management of Better pulverization
soils irrigation should be ensured should be made for
for provide life saving
conservation of soil
irrigation
moisture following by
planking for sowing of
early rabi crops like
Proper electricity monitoring/
rostering system should be toria and potato etc..
ensured in area for regular
supply of electricity for
Toria variety- type-9,
pumping of water for life
type-36, PT-303, PT-30
saving irrigation
and ageti Rai should be
sown in 1st week of
September while
Bhawani variety can be
sown in 2nd week of
September.
In fallow fields to sow
Ageti rai, potato
varieties like Kufri
Ashoka, Kufri Chandra
mukhi and other
vegetable crops like
spinach,reddish
coriander etc.
21
Maize Harvesting of intercrop at Better pulverization
physiological maturity (Maize, should be made for
Blackgram and Greengram)
conservation of soil
moisture following by
Earthing up of Pigeonpea
planking for sowing of
Harvesting of green cobs
early rabi crops like
(maize) and sell in market and toria and potato etc..
remaining portion will be used
for fodder.
Toria variety- type-9,
Blackgram/ Greengram Life saving irrigation to type-36, PT-303, PT-30
pigeonpea if possible. and ageti Rai should be
sown in 1st week of
September while
Bhawani variety can be
sown in 2nd week of
September.
Pigeonpea -
22
2.1.2 Drought - Irrigated situation
Suggested Contingency measures
Normal
Condition Major Farming Change in crop/cropping Remarks on
Crop/cropping Agronomic measures
situation system Implementation
system
Delayed release of water Deep clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Short duration rice varieties- Community nursery Breeder’s seed
in canals due to low Lentil NDR 97, Ratna, Narendra will be supplied
rainfall 118, Narendra 97, Pant Dhan Direct seeding in small beds. by BHU and
12, HUR 105, Induri Sambha, NDUAT,
HUR 2-1, HUR-3022 to be Use of micro-irrigation Faizabad.
grown under aerobic systems viz. sprinkler & sub-
condition. surface irrigation. Seed drills RKVY
and supply of
Limited release of water Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Rice\ Maize \ Sorghum Community nursery, seeds NFSM
in canals due to low soils Lentil
rainfall Grow short duration aerobic Direct seeding in small beds.
rice such as NDR 97, NDR
118, Govind, Vandana, Use of micro-irrigation
Varanideep, Susk Samrat , systems viz. sprinkler & sub-
HUR 105 surface irrigation.
Maize: Malviya hybrid
Makka-2, Naveen & Jaunpuri
Pearl millet : WCC 75, Raj
171, Pusa 23
Sorghum: CSH-16, CHS-9,
CHS-14, CSV-13 &CSV-15
should be grown on ridges for
fodder/grain purposes.
23
Non release of water in Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Shift to only aerobic rice Direct seeding in small beds.
canals under delayed soils Lentil Or Rice may be replaced by
onset of monsoon in pulses Use of micro-irrigation
catchment Greengram: Pant Mung -8, systems viz. sprinkler & sub-
PDM-11, Samrat, Jyoti, surface irrigation.
Jagriti, Janpriya, Jan Chetana
& Jan Kalyani
Blackgram: Type 9, Pant U
19, Pant U 35, Narendra Urd
1 & Azad Urd-3
Sesame :Type 4, T-12, T-13,
Shekhar, GT1, TC 25 &TC
289
Lack of inflows into Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Sorghum\ Pearl millet Conservation tillage,
tanks due to insufficient soils Lentil
/delayed onset of Sowing of Pearl millet &
monsoon Sorghum for grain purposes
at 45 cm on ridges.
Foliar application of 2%
MOP
Use of mulches (straw/dust).
Insufficient groundwater Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Rice should be replaced with Direct seeding in small beds.
recharge due to low soils Lentil pulses (green gram & black
rainfall gram), oilseeds (Sesame) in .
Kharif and wheat by
Chickpea & lentil in Rabi
season.
24
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short span Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity Post harvest
leading to water logging stage
Rice Provide drainage Proper bunding, drain out Harvesting at Shift to safer place
excess water physiological
maturity
Wheat Provide drainage Drain out excess water Harvesting at Shift to safer place
physiological
maturity
Pigeonpea Provide drainage and Make inter-row furrow to Harvesting at Shift to safer place
Practice of sowing on ridges Drain out excess water physiological
maturity
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in a - - - -
short span2
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to
unseasonal rains
Rice, Wheat, Chickpea, Pigeonpea, Pearl Need based plant protection Need based plant Need based plant Safe storage against
millet (integrated pest and disease protection (integrated protection stored grain pest
management) pest and disease (integrated pest and and diseases
management disease management
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice • Arrangement of Drainage • Removal of excess water Provide drainage Harvesting at physiological
channel • Drainage of excess water • Prevent premature seed maturity
• Drainage of water from the rice through drainage channel germination Shift produce to safer place
25
fields should be made. • Foliar spray of 5% urea Provision for buying /
• Raise community nursery in the marketing of discoloured
village grain at the earliest to
provide relief
Maize Provide drianage , creation of Divergent drain be made to Divergent drain be made
surface drains at appropriate collect runoff at suitable to collect runoff at
places to avoid water logging
points either in artificially suitable points either in
Removal of silt from contour
created ponds or diverting to artificially created
staggered trenches
wells. ponds or diverting to
wells.
Divergent drain be made to
collect runoff at suitable points
either in artificially Created
ponds or diverting to wells.
Drainage of excess water through
drainage channel should be
made.
Continuous submergence
for more than 2 days2
Rice • Drainage of excess water through • Just after finishing of floods, If crops fails due to • Preference should be given
drainage channel topdressing of urea could be water logging caused by for planting of Autumn
• Transplanting of deep water rice ensured in the field excess rainfall, then Sugarcane in the month of
–Madhupur, Jalmagn, Jalpriya, Oct so that their grand
resowing by end week
Jalnidhi, Awarodhi growth completed to the
of August or early
maxi. Extent prior to
maturing varieties of
In low lying areas; floods.
crops should be taken • Planting of Sugarcane on
1. Water stagnation upto 30-50 raised beds instead of flat
cm ht.- Mahsuri, Jal lahri, Drainage of excess water bed.
Swarna, Sabha mahsuri through drainage • Emphasis could be given
2. Water stagnation upto 50-100
26
cm height – Chakya-69, channel should be made. for cultivation of Toria,
Madhukar, Jalpriya Blackgram,
3. >100 cm height – Jalnidhi, If top dressing of urea is Greengram/Sunflower
Jalmagna not possible due to water
4. Water logging- Awarodhi, stagnation/floods, then
Madhukar foliar spray of 5% urea
solution can be done.
Drainage of excess water through
drainage channel should be
made.
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone
Suggested contingency measurer
Extreme event type
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave Not applicable
Cold wave
Wheat Provide light irrigation Provide light Provide light irrigation -
irrigation
Pigeonpea Mulching Light irrigation for Light irrigation for survival Harvesting at
survival physiological maturity
Frost Not applicable
Hailstorm Not Applicable
Cyclone Not Applicable
27
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
Feed and fodder availability • Storage of straw and silage in Silo pit
according to population of animal
Drinking water • Maintenance and inspection of Tubewells,
Hand pumps, Ponds,
Tanks etc.
Health and disease management • Vaccination of animals against FMD, HS,
B.Q. and Dewarming
Floods
Feed and fodder availability • Increase the area of fodder • Availability of safe place • Sowing of rabi fodder crops
for the animals - Berseems, Lucerne, Oat and other rabi
crops
Drinking water • Crops according to popu. and their storage • Distribution of stored feed • Drain of infected stored water and
and fodders according to the supply of fresh water for drinking.
popu. of affected
Health and disease management • Arrangement of clean drinking water in • Provide neat & clean • Proper treatment of affected (animals
sufficient water in growth drinking water vaccination & Dewarming)
Cyclone
Feed and fodder availability • Arrangement of clean drinking water in • Organize health camp -
sufficient water in growth regularly
Drinking water
Health and disease management
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environment • Shelter house/Farm house should not face • Proper availability of shelter, • Provide shelterbelts of good quality
management directly drinking water and feeds & materials
fodder as per need of the
animals
28
Health and disease management • Ensure the availability of drinking water and • Routine health check up by veterinary
as well as electrolytes doctors
s based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages with
Suggested contingency measures
ongoing programs, if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed ingredients
Drinking water • Deep tube well provide • Provide the drinking • Provide the drinking water
clean drinking water
Health and disease management • Vaccination against • Vaccination • Vaccination for
infectious diseases infectious diseases such as-
Ranikhet, infectious Coryza,
IBD, ILT
Floods
Shortage of feed ingredients • Inspection of established • Provide the drinking • Provide the drinking water
Tubewell & other water water
sources
Drinking water • Vaccination against • Vaccination • Vaccination for
infectious diseases infectious diseases such as-
Ranikhet, infectious Coryza,
IBD, ILT
Health and disease management
Cyclone
Shortage of feed ingredients
Drinking water
Health and disease management
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environment management • Arrangement of proper • Maintenance of • Heat check up
29
shelter and cooler/heater surrounds temp. and
to maintain the proper prevent the birds
temp. of the shelter house from direct exposure
of heat/ cold waves
Health and disease management • Vaccination
• Vaccination • Vaccination • Availability of neat
& clean water
a based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine
Inland Arrange for alternative water Sell the produce at minimum
Lime Application
resources acceptable size to the consumer
(i) Shallow water depth due to
Stocking of Air breathing
insufficient rains/inflow
(ii) Changes in water quality Increased water temperature
(iii) Any other Decrease dissolve oxygen
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to Arrange for alternative water Minimum disturbance to the fish Maintain the pond properly by liming,
insufficient rains/inflow resources i.e. minimum fishing activities manuring and fertlization
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in
ponds / change in water quality
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine
Inland Manage the inlet, outlet structures along
Harvest the large size fish Protect the escape of fish
with pond land
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged
(ii) No.of houses damaged
30
(iii) Loss of stock
(iv) Changes in water quality
(v) Health and diseases
B. Aquaculture
(i) Inundation with flood water Make 2.5 m high bylonnet boundry Check for outlet to remain open Close outlet and open inlet
on the band of pond
(ii) Water contamination and changes Close inlet and divert water Treatment of water with Alum and
in water quality receiving channel KmnO
4
(iii) Health and diseases Feeding, liming, manuring and
fertilization of ponds
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, huts etc)
3. Cyclone / Tsunami
A. Capture
B. Aquaculture
(i) Overflow / flooding of ponds Stocking of fish sped for a period
of 1-2 month
(ii) Changes in water quality (fresh Liming Lime+alum Harvesting and selling fish seeds
water / brackish water ratio)
(iii) Health and diseases Lime+alum
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed, Netting of fish+KmnO application
4
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, shelters/huts etc)
4. Heat wave and cold wave Not applicable
a based on forewarning wherever available
31