State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Balrampur
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Eastern Plain, Hot Subhumid (moist) Eco-sub region (13.2)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) Middle Gangetic Plain Region (IV)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) North Eastern Plain Zone (UP-8)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Barabanki,Ambedkarnagar,Faizabad,Sultanpur,Azamgarh,Mau,Jaunpur,Varanasi, Gazipur, Ballia,
Zone*(*>50% area falling in the zone) Bhadohi
Geographic coordinates of district Latitude Longitude Altitude
headquarters 26o75’ N 82o07’ E 91.5 -106 m
Name and address of the concerned Directorate of Research, SAU, Kumarganj, Faizabad
ZRS/ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with KVK, Balrampur
address
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number)
SW monsoon (June-Sep) 1076.8 42 3rd week of June 1st week of October
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec) 81.4 7 - -
Winter (Jan- Feb) 60 4 - -
Summer (March-May) 34.9 6 - -
Annual 1253.1 59 - -
1
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of Area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
the agricultural Misc. land (acres)
district use tree
crops
and
groves
Area (‘000 324.69 212.6 58.9 33.3 0.23 2.015 5.36 3.51 5.96 2.7
ha)
1. 4 Major Soils Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total Geographical area
Sandy loam soils - -
Loam soils - -
Clay loam soils - -
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity (% )
Net sown area 212.6
Area sown more than once 152.1 172.41
Gross cropped area 364.2
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 252.204
Gross irrigated area 368.329
Rainfed area
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 64.01 19.28
Tanks 0.004
Open wells 0.133
Bore wells 17.54 174.05 47.25
Lift irrigation schemes
Micro-irrigation
2
Other sources (please specify)
Total Irrigated Area 368.329
Pump sets 135 36.6
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils such as high levels of arsenic,
Department /Board) fluoride, saline etc)
Over exploited
Critical
Semi- critical
Safe
Wastewater availability and use
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures of 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated Kharif Rabi
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer Grand total
Rice 100.6 0.3 100.9 - - - - 100.9
Sorghum 0.1 - 0.1 - - - - 0.1
Maize 5.6 0.4 6.0 - - - - 6.0
Pigeonpea 5.4 - 5.4 - - - - 5.4
Wheat - - - 83.1 0.06 83.2 - 83.2
Chickpea - - - 4.9 4.9 - 4.9
Lentil - - - 26.0 0.003 26.0 - 26.0
3
Horticulture crops - Fruits Area (‘000 ha)
- - -
Horticulture crops - Total Irrigated Rainfed
Vegetables
Potato 2.6 2.6
Onion 0.1 0.1
Others 6.8 6.6 0.224
Medicinal and Aromatic crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 0.11
Bajra 1.06
Maize 557.3
Total fodder crop area 3.6 1.2 2.4
Grazing land
Sericulture etc
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Indigenous 306.29
Non descriptive Cattle
(local low yielding)
Improved crossbred cattle (Cow & Buffalo only) 214.08
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding)
Buffaloes
Goat - 136.0
Sheep - 0.82
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak, Horse, Monkey etc.) - 10.20
Commercial dairy farms (Number) - - -
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000) 141.295
4
Commercial 383 89270
Backyard 167 14807
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: Fisheries No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Department) facilities (Ice
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized
plants etc.)
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake &
Gill nets) trap nets)
ii) Inland (Data Source: Fisheries No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Department)
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000 tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department)
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department)
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years: 2004 - 08)
1.11 Name of Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
crop residue
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
as
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
fodder
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
Rice 205 2030 - - - - 205 2030 -
Sorghum 120 1091 - - - - 120 1091 -
Maize 561 1007 - - - - 561 1007 -
Pigeon pea 413 765 - - - - 413 765 -
Wheat - - - - - - 291 2209 -
5
Pea - - 162 938 - - 162 938 -
Lentil - - 295 938 - - 295 938 -
Mustard - - 73 773 - - 73 773 -
Potato - - 549 210 - - 549 210 -
1.12 Sowing window for
5 major field crops
Rice Maize Wheat Lentil
(start and end of normal
sowing period)
Kharif- Rainfed 3rd week of June – 2nd week of June –
3rd week of July 4th week of June
Kharif-Irrigated 4th week of June – 3rd week of June –
2nd week of August 3rd week of July
Rabi- Rainfed 3rd week of October – 1st week of October –
3rd week of November 4th week of October
Rabi-Irrigated 3rd week of November –
4th week of December
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Flood √
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √
Cold wave √
Frost √
Sea water intrusion √
Pests and disease outbreak √
6
1.14 Include Digital maps Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
of the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
Annexure I
7
8
Annexure II
9
Annexure III
SOILS OF BALRAMPUR DISTRICT (U.P.)
Piedmont Plains (1-3% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and moderately eroded associated with loamy
soils and slightly eroded
2. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded
3. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
4. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded
5. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty soils
6. Deep, fine soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils
slightly saline and moderately sodic
7. Deep, fine soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils
8. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy
soils with moderate salinity and sodicity and moderate water
logging.
9. Deep, silty soils associated with loamy soils slightly eroded
Old Alluvial plain with river left out channels/Oxbows/point bars (1-
3%slope)
10. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with stratified
loamy soils slightly eroded
Recent Alluvial Plain (1-3% slope)
11. Deep, loamy soils with moderate water logging and slight
salinity associated with fine soils, slightly water logging
12. Deep, silty soils and slight flooding associated with loamy soils
and slight flooding
Active Flood Plain (1-3% slope)
13. Deep, stratified loamy soils with but moderately flooding
14. Deep, sandy soils with moderate flooding associated with
stratified loamy soils and slight flooding
10
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system cropping system Implementation
onset) including variety
Delay by 2 weeks Deep loamy soils Rice Rice Raise Staggered rice nursery should be
(tarai soils) Transplanting/Direct grown at 15 days interval in small areas at
1st week of July seeding of Medium least two times
and Short duration
varieties of Rice Such
as NDR-97, NDR-
359,NDR-80,NDR-
118, Baranideep etc. -
Sandy loam soils Maize Maize Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
duration varieties of Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea Pigeonpea Sowing on raised beds,
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system system including variety Implementation
onset)
11
Delay by 4 weeks Deep loamy soils Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat • Direct seedling of short • Seed-drill under
(tarai soils) duration varieties of Rice RKVY
3rd week of July Transplanting/Direct seeding such as NDR-97, NDR-80, • Supply of seed
of Medium and Short NDR-118, Saket-4 through govt.
duration varieties of Rice agencies ie.
Such as NDR-97, NDR- • Raise Staggered rice nursery NFSM,RKVY
359,NDR-80,NDR-118, should be grown at 15 days
Baranideep, Govind,Saket-4, interval in small areas at least
Ratna,IR-36 and Pant-12 etc. two times
• Adopt SRI system of nursery
raising
• Transplanting of Rice
(beyond 20th July) with 3-4
seedlings/hill to increasing
the plant population of 60
hills/m2, instead of 50
hills/m2.
• Pruning of over aged Rice
seedlings for better
establishment and optimum
plant stand
• Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Sandy loam soils Maize Maize Maintain weed free
Maize-Prakash, Sartaj, condition for soil moisture
Naveen, Tarun. conservation
Intercropping/ mixed
12
cropping of maize with long
duration varieties of
Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea No change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system system including variety Implementation
onset)
Delay by 6 weeks Deep loamy soils Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat Direct seeding of rice • Seed-drill under
1st week of (tarai soils) RKVY
August Paddy: Short duration In case of late transplanting • Supply of seed
varieties of paddy such as of rice(beyond 20th July) through govt.
NDR-97, NDR-80,NDR-118, planting should be dense by agencies ie.
NFSM,RKVY
Pant Dhan-12 should be increasing the number of
transplanted/direct seeding. seedlings/hill from 2 to 3 to 3
to 4.
Adopt SRI system of nursery
raising
Weeding and interculture
Foliar spraying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
13
Life saving irrigation in
transplanted rice
Sandy loam soils Maize Greengram/ Blackgram Intercropping/ mixed
cropping of Greengram/
Greengram: T-44, Pant Blackgram/
mung-1, Narendra mung-1 maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet
with long duration varieties
Blackgram : Narendra urd- of pigeonpea
1,Pant urd-25
Sorghum+green gram(2:2)
Pigeonpea Pigeonpea: Bahar Maize (Tipekhiya) in
Pigeonpea(Narendra Arhar-
1) crop in 1:1 row ratio
Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Pigeonpea+
Blackgram/Greengram (1:3)
14
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system system including variety Implementation
onset)
Delay by 8 weeks Deep loamy soils Rice-Wheat Preference should be given Direct sowing • Seed-drill under
3rd week of (tarai soils) for sowing of Pearlmillet and RKVY
August Sesame In case of late transplanting • Supply of seed
of rice(beyond 20th July) through govt.
Pearlmillet: Pusa 322, planting should be dense agencies ie.
by increasing the number NFSM,RKVY
323(Hybrid) and WCC-75,
of seedlings/hill from 2 to
Raj-171(Composite)
3 to 3 to 4.
Sesame: - Type-4, Type-78,
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Type-12
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
Greengram : T-44, Pant
tolerance in nursery /
mung-1, Pant mung-2,
standing crops
Samrat, Malviya, Janpriya,
Malviya jyoti, Narendra
Life saving irrigation in
mung-1
transplanted rice
Sandy loam soils Maize Intercropping/ mixed
Blackgram : Narendra urd-
cropping of Greengram/
1,Pant urd-25, Pant urd-19,
Blackgram/maize/sorghum/
Uttara, Type-9
Pearlmillet with long
duration varieties of
pigeonpea
Land preparation for
sowing of early rabi crops
like potato,toria,lahi and
mustard
15
Pigeonpea September Pigeonpea -
Varieties Bahar, PDA-11,
Pusa-9 should be done till Ist
week of September.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Soil nutrient &
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
drought (Normal Crop management moisture conservation
situation system Implementation
onset) measures
Normal onset Deep loamy soils Rice After seeding of rice if there is Weeding at critical • Supply of inter
followed by 15-20 (tarai soils) break of monsoon by 7 to 10 stages cultural
days dry spell after days and if seedling mortality is implements
sowing leading to Foliar praying of 2.5 kg through RKVY
observed then re-sowing with the
poor germination/ Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as • Farm ponds
same variety
crop stand etc. to increase the drought through IWSM
tolerance in nursery / programme
Gap filling/transplanting in rice
standing crops • Pulse crop seeds
supply through
Using “Sanda” method, plant
Life saving irrigation NFSM
polulation can be maintainted
with sufficient number of tillers Proper electricity
in late drought condition as to monitoring/rostering
minimize the production losses system should be
ensured in area for
regular supply of
electricity for pumping
of water for life saving
irrigation
Sandy loam soils Maize Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain moisture
optimum plant population
16
Pigeonpea Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain moisture
optimum plant population
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season
drought (long dry Soil nutrient &
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
spell, consecutive 2 Crop management moisture conservation
situation system Implementation
weeks rainless measures
(>2.5 mm) period)
At vegetative stage Deep loamy soils Rice Gap filling/transplanting in rice Weeding as to conserve
(tarai soils) the residual soil
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to moisture
boost up the growth
Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as
to increase the drought -
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation
from the stored water
during the rainy season.
Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering
system should be
ensured in area for
17
regular supply of
electricity for pumping
of water for life saving
irrigation
Sandy loam soils Maize Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2%
distance between the plants. MOP to increase the
resistance to drought
Frequent interculture
Leaf mulching to
Earthing up in Pigeonpea conserve the soil
moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to
boost up the growth Conservation furrow
Life saving irrigation
Pigeonpea -
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought (long dry Crop management
situation system conservation measures Implementation
spell)
At flowering/ Deep clay loam Rice Foliar spraying of 2% Weeding as to conserve the
fruiting stage soils urea to boost up the residual soil moisture
growth
Leaf mulching to conserve the soil
-
moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5
kg Potash as to increase the
18
drought tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation from the
stored water during the rainy
season.
Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering system
should be ensured in area for
regular supply of electricity for
pumping of water for life saving
irrigation
Maize Thinning to maintain Foliar spraying of 2% MOP to
proper distance between increase the resistance to drought
the plants.
Pigeonpea
Leaf mulching to conserve the soil
Frequent interculture moisture
Earthing up in Pigeonpea Conservation furrow
Life saving irrigation
Foliar spraying of 2%
urea to boost up the
growth
19
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Terminal
Normal
drought Major Farming Remarks on
Crop/cropping Crop management Rabi Crop planning
(Early withdrawal situation Implementation
system
of monsoon)
Deep clay loam Rice Alternate management of Better pulverization should be
soils irrigation should be ensured for made for conservation of soil
provide life saving irrigation
moisture following by planking
for sowing of early rabi crops like
toria and potato etc..
Proper electricity monitoring/
rostering system should be
ensured in area for regular
Toria variety- type-9, type-36,
supply of electricity for
PT-303, PT-30 and ageti Rai
pumping of water for life should be sown in 1st week of
saving irrigation September while Bhawani variety
can be sown in 2nd week of
September.
In fallow fields to sow Ageti rai,
potato varieties like Kufri
Ashoka, Kufri Chandra mukhi
and other vegetable crops like
spinach,reddish coriander etc.
20
Maize Harvesting of intercrop at Better pulverization should be
physiological maturity (Maize, made for conservation of soil
Blackgram and Greengram)
moisture following by planking
for sowing of early rabi crops like
Earthing up of Pigeonpea
toria and potato etc..
Harvesting of green cobs
(maize) and sell in market and
Toria variety- type-9, type-36,
remaining portion will be used
PT-303, PT-30 and ageti Rai
for fodder.
should be sown in 1st week of
September while Bhawani variety
Life saving irrigation to
can be sown in 2nd week of
pigeonpea if possible.
September.
Pigeonpea -
21
2.1.2 Drought - Irrigated situation
Suggested Contingency measures
Normal
Condition Major Farming Agronomic Remarks on
Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping system
situation measures Implementation
system
Delayed release of water Deep clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Short duration rice varieties- NDR Community nursery Breeder’s seed
in canals due to low Lentil 97, Ratna, Narendra 118, Narendra will be supplied
rainfall 97, Pant Dhan 12, HUR 105, Induri Direct seeding in by BHU and
Sambha, HUR 2-1, HUR-3022 to small beds. NDUAT,
be grown under aerobic condition. Faizabad.
Use of micro-
irrigation systems viz. Seed drills
sprinkler & sub- RKVY and
surface irrigation. supply of seeds
NFSM
Siliting of canal
water/
Govt. Tubewell for
reaching the water at
end tail
22
Limited release of water Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Rice\ Maize \ Sorghum Community nursery,
in canals due to low soils Lentil
rainfall Grow short duration aerobic rice Direct seeding in
such as NDR 97, NDR 118, small beds.
Govind, Vandana, Varanideep,
Susk Samrat , HUR 105 Use of micro-
irrigation systems viz.
Maize: Malviya hybrid Makka-2, sprinkler & sub-
Naveen & Jaunpuri surface irrigation.
Pearl millet : WCC 75, Raj 171,
Pusa 23
Sorghum: CSH-16, CHS-9, CHS-
14, CSV-13 &CSV-15 should be
grown on ridges for fodder/grain
purposes.
Non release of water in Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Shift to only aerobic rice Direct seeding in
canals under delayed soils Lentil Or Rice may be replaced by pulses small beds.
onset of monsoon in Greengram: Pant Mung -8, PDM-
catchment 11, Samrat, Jyoti, Jagriti, Janpriya, Use of micro-
irrigation systems viz.
Jan Chetana & Jan Kalyani
sprinkler & sub-
Blackgram: Type 9, Pant U 19, Pant
surface irrigation.
U 35, Narendra Urd 1 & Azad Urd-
3
Sesame :Type 4, T-12, T-13,
Shekhar, GT1, TC 25 &TC 289
23
Lack of inflows into Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Sorghum\ Pearl millet Conservation tillage,
tanks due to insufficient soils Lentil
/delayed onset of Sowing of Pearl
monsoon millet & Sorghum for
grain purposes at 45
cm on ridges.
Foliar application of
2% MOP
Use of mulches
(straw/dust).
Canal and tubewell
channel should be
kept properly
cleaned(free of
weeds) and should be
ensured before
watering as to
increase the water
use efficiency
Insufficient groundwater Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Rice should be replaced with Direct seeding in
recharge due to low soils Lentil pulses (green gram & black gram), small beds.
rainfall oilseeds (Sesame) in Kharif and
wheat by Chickpea & lentil in Rabi .
season.
24
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a Vegetative stagek Flowering stagel Crop maturity stagem Post harvestn
short span leading to water
logging
Rice Provide drainage Proper bunding, drain out Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
excess water maturity
Wheat Provide drainage Drain out excess water Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
maturity
Pigeonpea Provide drainage and Make inter-row furrow to Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
Practice of sowing on ridges Drain out excess water maturity
Heavy rainfall with high speed - - - -
winds in a short span2
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to unseasonal rains
Rice, Wheat, Chickpea, Need based plant protection Need based plant protection Need based plant protection Safe storage against
Pigeonpea, Pearl millet (integrated pest and disease (integrated pest and disease (integrated pest and disease stored grain pest and
management) management management diseases
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice • Provide drainage • Removal of excess water • Foliar spray of 5% urea
Maize Provide drianage , Creation of
surface drains at appropriate
places to avoid water logging
Continuous submergence
for more than 2 days2
25
Rice • Drainage of excess water through • Just after finishing of floods, • Foliar spray of 5% urea • Preference should be given
drainage channel top dressing of urea could be for planting of Autumn
• Transplanting of deep water rice ensured in the field Sugarcane in the month of
–Madhupur, Jalmagn, Jalpriya, Oct so that their grand
Jalnidhi, Awarodhi growth completed to the
maxi. Extent prior to
floods.
• Planting of Sugarcane on
raised beds instead of flat
bed.
• Emphasis could be given
for cultivation of Toria,
Urd, Mung/Sunflower
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2 .4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measurer
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave Not applicable
Cold wave
Wheat Provide light irrigation Provide light irrigation Provide light irrigation -
Pigeonpea Mulching Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting at
physiological maturity
Frost: Not applicable
Hailstorm: Not applicable
Cyclone: Not applicable
26
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
Feed and fodder availability • Storage of straw and silage in silo pit
according to population of animal
Drinking water • Maintenance and inspection of Tubewells,
Hand pumps, Ponds, Tanks etc.
Health and disease management • Vaccination of animals against FMD, HS,
B.Q. and De warming
Floods
Feed and fodder availability • Increase the area of fodder • Provide safe place for the • Sowing of rabi fodder crops like
animals - Berseem, Lucerne, Oat and other rabi
crops
Drinking water • Crops according to population and their • Distribution of stored feed • Drain of infected stored water and
storage and fodders according to the supply of fresh water for drinking.
population
Health and disease management • Arrangement of clean drinking water • Provide neat & clean • Proper treatment of affected (animals
drinking water vaccination & Dewarming)
Cyclone
Feed and fodder availability • Arrangement of clean drinking water • Organize health camp -
regularly
Drinking water
Health and disease management
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environment • Shelter house/Farm house should not face • Proper availability of shelter, • Provide shelterbelts of good quality
management directly drinking water and feeds & materials
fodder as per need of the
animals
27
Health and disease management • Ensure the availability of drinking water and • Routine health check up by veterinary
as well as electrolytes doctors
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages
Suggested contingency measures with ongoing programs,
if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed ingredients
Drinking water • Deep tube well provide • Provide the drinking • Provide the drinking water
clean drinking water
Health and disease management • Vaccination against • Vaccination • Vaccination for
infectious diseases infectious diseases such as-
Ranikhet, infectious Coryza,
IBD, ILT
Floods
Shortage of feed ingredients • Inspection of established • Provide the drinking • Provide the drinking water
Tubewell & other water water
sources
Drinking water • Vaccination against • Vaccination • Vaccination for
infectious diseases infectious diseases such as-
Ranikhet, infectious Coryza,
IBD, ILT
Health and disease management
Cyclone
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environment management • Maintenance of
• Arrangement of proper
surrounds temp. and
shelter and cooler/heater
prevent the birds • Heat check up
to maintain the proper
from direct exposure
temp. of the shelter house
of heat/ cold waves
28
Health and disease management • Vaccination
• Vaccination • Vaccination • Availability of neat
& clean water
a based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine
Inland Arrange for alternative water Sell the produce at minimum
Lime Application
resources acceptable size to the consumer
(i) Shallow water depth due to
Stocking of Air breathing
insufficient rains/inflow
(ii) Changes in water quality Increased water temperature
(iii) Any other Decrease dissolve oxygen
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to Arrange for alternative water Minimum disturbance to the fish Maintain the pond properly by liming,
insufficient rains/inflow resources i.e. minimum fishing activities manuring and fertilization
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in
ponds / change in water quality
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine
Inland Manage the inlet, outlet structures along
Harvest the large size fish Protect the escape of fish
with pond land
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged
(ii) No.of houses damaged
(iii) Loss of stock
(iv) Changes in water quality
(v) Health and diseases
B. Aquaculture
29
(i) Inundation with flood water Make 2.5 m high bylonnet boundry Check for outlet to remain open Close outlet and open inlet
on the band of pond
(ii) Water contamination and changes Close inlet and divert water Treatment of water with Alum and
in water quality receiving channel KmnO
4
(iii) Health and diseases Feeding, liming, manuring and
fertilization of ponds
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, huts etc)
3. Cyclone / Tsunami
A. Capture
B. Aquaculture
(i) Overflow / flooding of ponds Stocking of fish sped for a period
of 1-2 month
(ii) Changes in water quality (fresh Liming Lime+alum Harvesting and selling fish seeds
water / brackish water ratio)
(iii) Health and diseases Lime+alum
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed, Netting of fish+KmnO application
4
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, shelters/huts etc)
4. Heat wave and cold wave Not Applicable
30