State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Faizabad
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Eastern Plain, Hot Subhumid (moist) Eco-sub region (13.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) Middle Gangetic Plain Region (IV)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Eastern Plain Zone (UP-9)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Zone* Faizabad,Ambedkarnaagr,Sultanpur,Barabanki,Gazipur,Ballia,Mau,Azamgarh,Jaunpur,Varanasi,
(*>50% area falling in the zone) Bhadohi
Geographic coordinates of district headquarters Latitude Longitude Altitude
26’o47’ N 82o12’ E 339 ft
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ ZARS/ Directorate of Research, SAU, Kumarganj
RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with address KVK, Masodha(ICAR)
Name and address of the nearest Agromet Field Unit -
(AMFU, IMD) for agro-advisories in the Zone
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Onset Normal Cessation
SW monsoon (June-Sep): 860.4 3rd week of June 1st week of October
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec): 49.9
Winter (Jan- February) 29.8 - -
Summer (March-May) 30.8 - -
Annual 970.8 - -
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural use Misc. land
statistics) tree
crops
and
groves
Area (‘000 260.9 171.01 2.4 36.06 2 4.13 9.76 3.58 21.79 10
ha)
1. 4 Major Soils (common names like red sandy Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total
loam deep soils (etc.,)*
Silty Loam soils 293.2 65
Silty Loam(Bhat) soils 135.3 30
Alluvial soils 22.5 5
*Source ATMA, SREP Agriculture Dept. Sultanpur
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity %
Net sown area 171.016 163%
Area sown more than once 91.79
Gross cropped area 262.845
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area -
Gross irrigated area -
Rainfed area -
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals
2
Tanks
Open wells
Bore wells
Lift irrigation schemes
Micro-irrigation
Other sources (please specify)
Total Irrigated Area
Pump sets
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils such as high levels of arsenic, fluoride,
Department /Board) saline etc)
Over exploited
Critical
Semi- critical
Safe
Wastewater availability and use
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated
Kharif Rabi
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer Grand total
Rice 63.39 18.84 82.2 - - - - -
Maize 0 1.423 1.42 - - - - -
Pigeonpea 0 0.24 0.2 - - - - -
3
Wheat - - - 78.10 1.13 79.2 - -
Pea - - - 2.3 0.07 2.4 - -
Chickpea - - - 0 1.40 1.4 - -
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits
Total Irrigated Rainfed
Mango - - -
Guava - - -
Aonla - - -
Papya - - -
Banana - - -
Horticulture crops - - - -
Vegetables
Medicinal and Aromatic - - -
crops
Plantation crops - - -
Eg., industrial pulpwood - - -
crops etc.
Fodder crops - - -
Total fodder crop area - - -
4
Grazing land - - -
Sericulture etc - - -
Others (specify) - - -
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding) -
Improved cattle -
Crossbred cattle(Cow) 327.3
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) 225.99
Descript Buffaloes
Goat 147.95
Sheep 13.93
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak etc.) 10.70
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial
Backyard
Total 162.345
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: Fisheries Department) No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
facilities (Ice
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized plants etc.)
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake
Gill nets) & trap nets)
5
ii) Inland (Data Source: Fisheries Department) No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield Production (‘000 tons)
(t/ha)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department)
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department) 95.70 0.5 0.049
Others
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops
1.11 Name of Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
crop residue
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
as fodder
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Rice 189.21 2301 - - - - 189.21 2301 -
Maize 13.5 954 - - - - 13.5 954 -
Pigeon pea 2.224 926 - - - - 2.224 926 -
Wheat - - 218.54 2758 - - 218.54 2758 -
Pea - - 2.30 938 - - 2.30 938 -
Others Chickpea - - 1.45 1033 - - 1.45 1033 -
Major Horticultural crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Crop 1 - - - - - - - -
6
1.12 Sowing window for 5
major field crops
Rice Maize Pigeon pea Wheat Pea
(start and end of normal
sowing period)
Kharif- Rainfed 2nd week of June- 1st week of June- - - -
3rd week of July 4th week of June
Kharif-Irrigated 4th week of June- 3rd week of June- - - -
2nd week of August 2nd week of July
Rabi- Rainfed - - 2nd week of October- 1st week of October-3rd 2nd week of October-
2nd week of November week of October 2nd week of November
Rabi-Irrigated - - 2nd week of November- -
4th week of December
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought (cid:1)
Flood (cid:1)
Cyclone (cid:1)
Hail storm (cid:1)
Heat wave (cid:1)
Cold wave (cid:1)
Frost (cid:1)
Sea water intrusion (cid:1)
Pests and disease outbreak (specify) (cid:1) (cid:1)
1.14 Include Digital maps of Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
9
Annexure II
Mean annual rainfall (mm)
350
308.9
300
277
250
200
179.7
150
94.8
100
40.4
50
17.7 13.1 9 4.9 15.9 2.8 6.7
0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov DDeecc
10
Annexure III
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded
2. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty soils.
3. Deep, fine soils and slightly saline/sodic associated with loamy soils
with slightl salinity/sodicity
4. Deep, fine soils moderately saline and sodic associated with loamy
soils, slightly eroded
5. Deep, fine soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils
slightly saline and moderately sodic
6. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils
with moderate salinity and sodicity and moderate water logging.
7. Deep, fine soils and slight salinity and sodicity associated with loamy
soils with moderate salinity and sodicity
8. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded associated with fine soils
Recent Alluvial Plain (1-3% slope)
9. Deep, loamy soils, slightly eroded associated with silty soils and
slightly eroded
Active Flood Plain (1-3% slope)
10. Deep, sandy soils with moderate flooding associated with stratified
loamy soils and slight flooding
11. Deep, stratified loamy soils, with severe flooding associated with
loamy soils with moderate flooding
11
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system system including variety Implementation
onset)
Deep loamy soils Rice No change Raise Staggered rice nursery -
Delay by 2 weeks should be grown at 15 days
Transplanting/Direct seeding of interval in small areas at least two
Medium and Short duration times
1st week of July varieties of Paddy Such as NDR-
97, NDR-359,NDR-80,NDR-118, SRI system of paddy
Barami Deep etc. nursery/transplanting are suggested
Silt loam soils Maize Not Change Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with
long duration varieties of
Pigeonpea
Pigeon Pea Not Change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
maize/Greengram/Blackgram
12
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Crop/cropping system Implementation
onset) system
Deep loamy soils Rice Direct seedling of short duration • Transplanting of paddy with 3-4
Delay by 4 weeks varieties of paddy such as NDR- seedlings/hill to increasing the plant
97, NDR-80, NDR-118, Saket-4. population 60 hills/m2, instead of 50
3rd week of July hills/m2.
• Pruning of overaged paddy seedlings for
better establishment and optimum plant
stand.
• Thinning of over aged paddy seedlings
for better establishment and optimum
plant stand.
• Foliar spraying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5 kg
Potash as to increase the drought
tolerance.
Mulching with straw/ Grass cover.
Shallow silt loam soils Maize Maize-Prakash, Sartaj, Naveen, Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Tarun. maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
duration varieties of Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea No change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
13
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Crop/cropping Implementation
onset) system
Deep loamy soils Rice Rice-Wheat Direct seeding of rice Supply of seed
Delay by 6 weeks through govt.
Paddy: Short duration varieties of In case of late transplanting of
agencies i.e. NFSM,
1st week of August paddy such as NDR-97, NDR- rice(beyond 20th July) planting should
RKVY
80,NDR-118, Pant Dhan-12 should be be dense by increasing the number of
transplanted/direct seeding. seedlings/hill from 2 to 3 to 3 to 4. Seed drill under
RKVY
Adopt SRI system of nursery raising
Weeding and interculture
Foliar spraying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5 kg
Potash as to increase the drought
tolerance in nursery / standing crops
Life saving irrigation in transplanted
rice
Shallow silt loam Maize Greengram/ Blackgram Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
soils Greengram/ Blackgram/
Greengram: T-44, Pant mung-1, maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
Narendra mung-1 duration varieties of pigeonpea
Blackgram : Narendra urd-1,Pant urd-
25
Pigeon pea Varieties -Bahar, PDA-11, Pusa
14
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system Implementation
onset)
Deep loamy soils Rice-Wheat Preference should be given Direct sowing -
Delay by 8 weeks for sowing of Pearlmillet and
In case of late transplanting of
Sesame
3rd week of August rice(beyond 20th July) planting
should be dense by increasing
Pearlmillet: Pusa 322,
the number of seedlings/hill
323(Hybrid) and WCC-75,
from 2 to 3 to 3 to 4.
Raj-171(Composite)
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea
Sesame: - Type-4, Type-78,
+ 2.5 kg Potash as to increase
Type-12
the drought tolerance in
nursery / standing crops
Greengram : T-44, Pant
mung-1, Pant mung-2,
Life saving irrigation in
Samrat, Malviya, Janpriya,
transplanted rice
Malviya jyoti, Narendra
Shallow silt loam Maize Intercropping/ mixed cropping
mung-1
soils of Greengram/
Blackgram/maize/sorghum/
Blackgram : Narendra urd-
Pearlmillet with long duration
1,Pant urd-25, Pant urd-19,
varieties of pigeonpea
Uttara, Type-9
Land preparation for sowing
of early rabi crops like
potato,toria,lahi and mustard
Pigeonpea September Pigeonpea -
Varieties Bahar, PDA-11,
Pusa-9 should be done till Ist
week of September.
15
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season drought Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
(Normal onset) situation conservation measures Implementation
Deep loamy soils Rice After seeding of rice if Weeding at critical stages
Normal onset there is break of monsoon
followed by 15-20 Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea +
by 7 to 10 days and if
days dry spell after 2.5 kg Potash as to increase the
seedling mortality is
sowing leading to drought tolerance in nursery /
observed then re-sowing
poor standing crops
germination/crop with the same variety
stand etc. Life saving irrigation
Gap filling/transplanting
in rice Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering system
Using “Sanda” method, should be ensured in area for
plant polulation can be regular supply of electricity for
maintainted with pumping of water for life saving
irrigation
sufficient number of
tillers in late drought
condition as to minimize
the production losses
Shallow silt loam Maize Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to conserve the
soils soil moisture
Gap filling/ Thinning to
maintain optimum plant
population
Pigeonpea Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to conserve the
soil moisture
Gap filling/ Thinning to
maintain optimum plant
population
16
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season drought Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
(long dry spell, situation moisture conservation Implementation
consecutive 2 weeks measues
rainless (>2.5 mm)
period)
Deep loamy soils Rice Gap filling/transplanting in rice Weeding as to conserve
At vegetative stage the residual soil moisture
Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation from
the stored water during
the rainy season.
Shallow silt loam Maize/ Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2%
soils Greengram / distance between the plants. MOP to increase the
resistance to drought
Blackgram
Frequent interculture
Leaf mulching to
Pigeon pea
Earthing up in Pigeonpea conserve the soil moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to Conservation furrow
boost up the growth Life saving irrigation
17
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought (long dry situation conservation measues Implementation
spell)
Deep loamy soils Rice Intercultural operations Weeding as to conserve
At flowering/ the residual soil moisture
fruiting stage
Leaf mulching to
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to conserve the soil moisture
boost up the growth
Foliar spray of 2.5 kg urea
+2.5 kg Potash in standing
crop.
Mulching
Life saving irrigation from
the stored water during the
rainy season.
Loam soils Maize/ Greengram / Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2%
Blackgram/ Pigeon pea distance between the plants. MOP to increase the
resistance to drought
Frequent interculture
Leaf mulching to
Earthing up in Pigeonpea conserve the soil moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to Conservation furrow
boost up the growth Life saving irrigation
18
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Terminal drought Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Rabi Crop planning Remarks on
(Early withdrawal of situation Implementation
monsoon)
Rice In case of fallow land
Foliar spray of 2.5 kg Potash 2.5 sowing of Toria, Type-9,
kg urea as to create drought PT 303 and Ageti Rai
should be sown in Ist
tolerance
week of September while
Bhawani variety can be
Alternate management of
sown in 2nd week of
irrigation should be ensured for
September.
provide life saving irrigation
Maize Harvesting of intercrop at Better pulverization
Blackgram/ Greengram physiological maturity (Maize, should be made for
Blackgram and Greengram)
conservation of soil
moisture following by
Earthing up of Pigeonpea
planking for sowing of
Harvesting of green cobs (maize) early rabi crops like toria
and sell in market and remaining and potato etc..
portion will be used for fodder.
Life saving irrigation to Toria variety- type-9,
pigeonpea if possible. type-36, PT-303, PT-30
and ageti Rai should be
sown in 1st week of
September while Bhawani
variety can be sown in 2nd
week of September.
Pigeonpea
19
2.1.2 Drought - Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation Implementation
Delayed release of Not applicable
water in canals due
to low rainfall
Limited release of Not applicable
water in canals due
to low rainfall
Non release of water Not applicable
in canals under
delayed onset of
monsoon in
catchment
Lack of inflows into Not applicable
tanks due to
insufficient /delayed
onset of monsoon
Insufficient Sandy clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Lentil Rice should be replaced with Direct seeding in small
groundwater pulses (green gram & black beds.
recharge due to low gram), oilseeds (Sesame) in
rainfall Kharif and wheat by Chickpea & .
lentil in Rabi season.
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
span leading to water logging
Rice Provide drainage Proper bunding, drain out Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
excess water maturity
Wheat Provide drainage Drain out excess water Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
maturity
Pigeonpea Provide drainage and Make inter-row furrow to Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
20
Practice of sowing on ridges Drain out excess water maturity
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds - - - -
in a short span2
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to
unseasonal rains
Rice, Wheat, Chickpea, Pigeonpea, Need based plant protection Need based plant protection Need based plant protection Safe storage against
Pearl millet (integrated pest and disease (integrated pest and disease (integrated pest and disease stored grain pest and
management) management management diseases
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ partial Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
inundation1
Rice • Arrangement of Drainage • Removal of excess water • Foliar spray of 5% urea -
channel
• Drainage of water from the rice
fields
Maize • Drainage of water
• Creation of surface drains at
appropriate places to avoid
water logging
Continuous submergence for more than 2 days2
Rice • Drainage of excess water • Just after finishing of floods, • Foliar spray of 5% urea • Preference should be given
through drainage channel topdressing of urea could be for planting of Autumn
• Transplanting of deep water rice ensured in the field Sugarcane in the month of
–Madhupur, Jalmagn, Jalpriya, October so that their grand
Jalnidhi, Awarodhi growth completed to the
maximum . Extent prior to
floods.
• Planting of Sugarcane on
raised beds instead of flat bed.
• Emphasis could be given for
21
cultivation of Toria,
Blackgram, Greengram
/Sunflower
Sea water intrusion Not applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone
Suggested contingency measurer
Extreme event type
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice Provide watering • Provide light irrigation Irrigation interval should be decreased -
Light and frequent irrigation during night • Irrigation interval should be
decreased
Wheat - - Provide light irrigation Harvesting at
physiological
maturity
Pigeonpea • Mulching • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased -
decreased
Cold wave
Wheat Provide light irrigation Provide light irrigation Provide light irrigation -
Pigeonpea Mulching Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting at
physiological
maturity
Frost
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival -
Pigeonpea • Grow as inter crop • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light irrigation for survival -
• Smoke generation to create heat during • Smoke generation to create heat • Smoke generation to create heat
night time during night time during night time
Hailstorm Not Applicable
Cyclone Not Applicable
22
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
Storage of straw and silage in silo pit Sowing of seasonal fodder crops for regular
according to population of animal fodder availability.
Properly distribution of stored feeding
Feed and fodder availability materials.
Maintenance and inspection of tubewells, Regular watch of various resources of water
Drinking water hand pumps, ponds, tanks etc. Filling of water tanks, ponds etc. and health of animals.
Health and disease management Vaccination of animals against FMD, HS, BQ
and de-worming
Health camp by veterinarians. Health camp by veterinarians
Floods
Increase the area of fodder crops according to Sowing of rabi fodder crops –berseem,
Feed and fodder availability population and their storage Availability of safe place for the animals Lucerne, oat & other rabi crops
Distribution stored feed and fodders
according to the population affected
areas
Arrangement of clean drinking water in Drain of infected stored water and supply of
Drinking water sufficient amount Provide need and clean drinking water fresh water for drinking
Vaccination of animal and availability of Proper treatment of affected animal,
Health and disease management veterinary medicines Organize heath camp regularly vaccination and dewarmig
Cyclone -NA -NA -NA
23
Feed and fodder availability -
Drinking water -
Health and disease management -
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter house/farm house should not face Proper availability of shelter, drinking
directly sunlight . Ensured the availability of water and feeds & fodders as per need of Provide shelter belts of good quality of
Shelter/environment management drinking water and as well as electrolytes animals materials
Routine health checkup by veterinarian Routine health checkup by veterinarian
Health and disease management doctors doctors
s based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages
with ongoing programs,
Suggested contingency measures if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed -
ingredients - - -
Provide the drinking water
Deep tubewell provide clean drinking
Drinking water water Provide the drinking water
Vaccination against infectious
Health and disease diseases such as Ranikhet,
management Vaccination against infectious diseases Vaccination infections, coryza, IBD, ILT
Floods -
24
Shortage of feed
ingredients
Vaccination against infectious
Inspection of established tubewell & other diseases such as Ranikhet,
Drinking water water resources Vaccination infections, coryza, IBD, ILT
Health and disease
management Vaccination against infection diseases Vaccination
Cyclone -NA-
Shortage of feed
ingredients -NA-
Drinking water -NA-
Health and disease
management -NA-
Heat wave and cold
wave
Arrangement of proper shelter and Maintenance of surrounding temp,.
Shelter/environment coolar/heater to maintain the proper temp. and prevent the birds from direct
management of the shelter house exposure of heat/cold waves Health check up
Health and disease
management Vaccination Vaccination Vaccination
Availability of clean water
a based on forewarning wherever available
25
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine -NA- -NA-
Inland
Arrangement for alternative water Sell the produce at minimum
resources acceptable size to the consumer Lime Application
(i) Shallow water depth due to
insufficient rains/inflow
Stocking of Air breathing
(ii) Changes in water quality
Turbidity Increased water temperature
(iii) Any other Decrease dissolve oxygen
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to
Arrange for alternative water Minimum disturbance to the fish Maintain the pond properly by liming,
insufficient rains/inflow
resources i.e. minimum fishing activities manuring and fertlization
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in
ponds / change in water quality -
(iii) Any other
-
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine
Manage the inlet, outlet structures
Harvest the large size fish Protect the escape of fish along with pond land
Inland
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged
(ii) No.of houses damaged
26
(iii) Loss of stock
(iv) Changes in water quality
(v) Health and diseases
B. Aquaculture
Stocking of fish sped for a period
(i) Inundation with flood water of 1-2 month
(ii) Water contamination and changes
in water quality Liming Lime+alum Harvesting and selling fish seeds
(iii) Health and diseases Lime+alum
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed, Netting of fish+KmnO application
4
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, huts etc)
(vi) Any other
3. Cyclone / Tsunami
A. Capture
Marine
(i) Average compensation paid due to
loss of fishermen lives
(ii) Avg. no. of boats / nets/damaged
(iii) Avg. no. of houses damaged
Inland
B. Aquaculture
Make 2.5 m high nylon net boundary
(i) Overflow / flooding of ponds on the band of pond Check for outlet to remain open Close outlet and open inlet
27
(ii) Changes in water quality (fresh Close inlet and divert water Treatment of water with Alum and
water / brackish water ratio) receiving channel KmnO
4
Feeding, liming, manuring and
(iii) Health and diseases fertilization of ponds
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, shelters/huts etc)
(vi) Any other
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
Marine
Inland
B. Aquaculture
(i) Changes in pond environment
(water quality)
(ii) Health and Disease management
(iii) Any other
a based on forewarning wherever available
28