State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Gautam Budh Nagar
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Northern Plain (And Central Highlands) Including Aravallis, Hot Semi-Arid Eco-Region (4.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Upper Gangetic plain (V)
Commission)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Western plain zone (UP-3)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Meerut, Bulandshahar, Ghaziabad, Bagpat, M. Nagar, Saharanpur
Zone*
(*>50% area falling in the zone)
Geographic coordinates of district Latitude Longitude Altitude
headquarters
280 24’ 14.731” N 770 32’ 33.870” E 200 mt.
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ -
ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district K.V.K, Chholas Tehsil Dadri, Gautam Budh Nagar of S.V.P.U. A & T, Meerut
with address
Name and address of the nearest Agromet S.V.P. University, Meerut
Field Unit (AMFU, IMD) for agro-
advisories in the Zone
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal onset Normal Cessation
(number) ( specify week and month) (specify week and month)
SW monsoon (June-Sep) 612 46 2nd week of June 2nd week of September
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec) 14 12 3rd week of December 2nd week of January
Winter (Jan- Feb) 0.7 14 - -
Summer (Mar-May) 29 7 - -
Annual 656 79 - -
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Perman Cultivable Land under Barren and Current Other
pattern of area area area non- ent wasteland Misc. tree uncultivabl fallows fallow
the agricultural pastures crops and e s
district use groves land
(latest
statistics)
Area (‘000 125.4 82.1 2 24 0.5 2.5 0.4 3.4 2.4 7.8
ha)
1. 4 Major Soils Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%)
Clay loam soils 42.7 52%
Loam soils 19.7 24%
Sandy loam soils 14.7 18%
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity %
Net sown area 82.1 154.18%
Area sown more than once 44.5
Gross cropped area 126.6
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 70.4
Gross irrigated area 126.6
Rainfed area 11.7
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 12.3 48.6%
Tanks 0.05 0.2%
Open wells 7.9 31.4%
Bore wells 4.9 19.4%
Lift irrigation schemes _ -
Micro-irrigation 0.01 0.05%
Other sources 0.09 3.9%
Total Irrigated Area 25.4
Pump sets
No. of Tractors
2
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils problem such as high levels of
Department /Board) Block-4 arsenic, fluoride, saline etc)
Over exploited Dadri 1 26.5 Not reported
Critical - - do
Semi- critical 1 - do
Safe 2 - do
Wastewater availability and use - - do
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures of 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops cultivated Area (‘000 ha)
Kharif Rabi
Grand
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer
total
Rice - 22 22
Pearl millet /Maize 1.9 1.9 1.9
Pigeonpea 0.6 0.6 0.6
Wheat 55.9 55.9 55.9
Sugarcane 2.6 2.6 2.6
Barley 2 2.004 2.004
Mustard 0.9 0.9 0.9
Toria 4.9 4.9 4.9
Horticulture crops - Fruits Area (‘000 ha)
Total Irrigated Rainfed
Mango+Ber 10.03 - 10.03
Total Irrigated Rainfed
All vegetable crops 20.6 14.2 6.4
Potato 0.5 0.5 -
Medicinal and Aromatic crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Flowers (Marigold+Gladiolus) 0.13 0.13 -
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 46.3 - 46.3
Pearl millet 8.1 - 8.1
Maize 12.2 6.1 6.1
3
Berseem 11.2 11.2 -
Total fodder crop area 54.4 17.3 60.5
Grazing land 0.01 - -
Sericulture etc 0.001 - -
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding) 47.9 148.1 196.1
Improved cattle
Crossbred cattle 10.2 31.3 41.6
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) 42.5 213.2 255.7
Descript Buffaloes 18.2 91.3 109.6
Goat 6.7 17.3 24.0
Sheep Indi + Exotic 577+14 782+10 1.3
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak etc.) 390.8
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial 0 0
Backyard 3.768+7.101=10.8
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
facilities
Fisheries Department Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized (Ice
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake plants
Gill nets) & trap nets) etc.)
- - - - - -
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
- - -
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000
tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - -
4
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department) - - -
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops
1.11 Name of Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
crop residue
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
as
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
fodder
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
Rice 52.9 2406 52.9 2406 31.7
Maize 2.9 1500 2.9 1500
Wheat 194.5 3477 194.5 3477 233.5
Sugarcane 161.5 62100 161.5 62100 193.3
Barley 7.1 3588 7.1 3588 8.6
Mustard 1 1105 1 1105
Major Horticultural crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
All fruits 200 1992
All 516.8 2506
vegetables
Potato 189.5 37901
Flower 0.3 288.9
1.12 Sowing window for 5 major Rice Maize Wheat & Barley Mustard Sugarcane
field crops
Kharif- Rainfed - June to July - - -
Kharif-Irrigated June to July June to July - - -
Rabi- Rainfed - - October to November October -
Rabi-Irrigated - - November to December November October
5
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Flood √
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √
Cold wave √
Frost √
Sea water intrusion √
Sheath Blight, Grass hopper, Pyrilla, Neck blast etc √
Fog √
1.14 Include Digital maps of the Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure II Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure III Enclosed: Yes
6
Annexure I
7
Annexure II
8
Annexure III
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly
2. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with
silty soils
3. Deep, fine soils moderately saline and sodic associated
with loamy soils, slightly eroded
4. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded associated with
loamy soils slightly saline and slightly sodic
Old Alluvial plain with river left out channels/Oxbows/point
bars (1-3%slope)
5. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with
stratified loamy soils slightly eroded
Recent Alluvial Plain (1-3% slope)
6. Deep, loamy soils, slight salinity and sodicity associated
with loamy soils are slightly eroded
9
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping systemc Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought Farming Cropping system including variety Implementation
(delayed situation
onset)
Delay by 2 Deep soil , Maize/ Sorghum/ Pearl Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, • Conservation furrow
weeks yellow , alluvial millet/ Pigeonpea Azad utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga • Inter-cultivation
4th week of loamy soils 2,11 Samrat etc • Sowing with multi
June Sorghum: CSH 14, 16, CSB 13, 15, seed drill
SPB 1338 etc • Wider spacing for
Pearl millet: Raj-171, WCC-75, Pusa pigeonpea
23, 322, ICMH-451 etc.
Pigeonpea: UPAS 120, ICPL 151,
Pusa 33 etc.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping systemc Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought Farming Cropping system including variety Implementation
(delayed situation
onset)
Delay by 4 Deep soil, Maize/ Pearl millet/ Til/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, • Conservation furrow Seed-drill under
weeks yellow, alluvial Blackgram Azad utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga • Inter-cultivation RKVY
2nd week of loamy soils 2,11 Samrat etc • Sowing with multi Supply of seed
July Pearl millet:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa seed drill through govt.
23, 322 icmh-451 agencies ie.
Til: Pergati, shekar, TA-78, TA-12 NFSM
Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1,
Pant U-30, 19, 35 etc
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping systemc Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought Farming Cropping system including variety Implementation
situation
Delay by 6 Deep soil, Blackgram/ Greengram / Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1, • Sowing with multi
weeks yellow , Toria/ Pearl millet Pant U-30, 19, 35 seed drill
alluvial loamy
4th week of soils Greengram: Pant mung -2, 3,
July Narender mung -1, 4, SML-668,
PDM-11
Pearl millet:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa
10
23, 322 ICMH - 451
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping systemc Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought Farming Cropping system including variety Implementation
situation
Delay by 8 Deep soil, Toria Toria: P.T.-30, 507, 303, • Conservation furrow • Seed-drill
weeks yellow , alluvial Bhawani, T-9 • Inter-cultivation under RKVY,
loamy soils • Sowing with multi
2nd week of seed drill
August Supply of seed
through govt.
agencies i.e.
NFSM
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought situation Cropping system conservation measures Implementation
(Normal
onset)
Normal onset Alluvial loamy Rice/ Maize/ Blackgram/ Thinning, weeding and gap • Inter cultivation • Supply of inter
followed by soils Sorghum (Fodder) filling in existing crop. • Conservation furrow cultural
15-20 days Re sowing • Mulching implements
dry spell Sowing of short duration rice through RKVY
after sowing cultivar • Farm ponds
leading to through IWSM
poor programme
germination/
crop stand
etc.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought situation system conservation measures Implementation
(long dry
spell,
consecutive
2 weeks
rainless
(>2.5 mm)
period)
11
At vegetative Alluvial loamy Rice/ Sugarcane/ Thining, weeding and gap filling • Inter cultivation • Supply of inter
stage soils Blackgram/ in existing crop. • Conservation furrow cultural
Maize/ Sorghum (Fodder) Postponement of top dressing • Mulching implements
Life saving irrigation through RKVY
• Farm ponds
through IWSM
programme
• Micro/drip/sprinkl
er irrigation under
govt. schemes
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
drought (long Farming system moisture conservation Implementation
dry spell) situation measures
At flowering/ Alluvial Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Thinning, weeding and gap filling Conservation furrow, Farm ponds through
fruiting stage loamy soils Sorghum (Fodder)/ in existing crop, Mulching, IWSM programme
Blackgram/ Pearl millet Life saving irrigation, Urea spray
Weeding and weed mulching
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping Crop management Rabi crop planning Remarks on
Farming system Implementation
situation
Terminal Alluvial Rice/ Maize/ Sorghum/ Life saving irrigation, Toria/Mustard Farm ponds through
drought loamy soils Blackgram/ Pigeonpea/ Picking/harvesting of pods/ear, Potato IWSM programme,
(Early Harvest at physiological maturity Pea/Chickpea Harvesting and
Pearl millet / Sesame
withdrawal of stage , Berseem/oat threshing implements
monsoon) Harvest for fodder through RKVY,
Supply of land lazer
labeler through CLDP
or RKVY
12
1.1.2.
Drought Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/ Change in crop/cropping systemh Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf cropping systemg Implementationj
Delayed Upland sandy Rice (Basmati)-Wheat Replace rice with maize Light irrigation with Seed through KSSC
release of loamy soils Maize: Kanchan, Sweta, Navin, tube well water, and NFSM
water in Surya Alternate Furrow
canals due to Pearl millet:WCC-75, Raj-171, irrigation,
low rainfall Pusa-23, Pusa-322 Mulching in maize
Sorghum (Fodder)/ Pearl millet/Greengram/ Blackgram
Maize-Potato/ Wheat - Potato/ Wheat
Sugarcane +cucurbits – No change
Ratoon-Wheat
Lowland clay Rice-wheat Basmati rice –Wheat Light irrigation with Seed through KSSC
loamy soils Use short duration varieties e.g. tube well water, and NFSM,
Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, PRH 10 Follow alternate
wetting and drying
Sorghum Fodder-Wheat Pearl millet-Wheat schedule of irrigation
Pearl millet:WCC-75, Raj-171, in rice,
Pusa-23, Pusa-322 Alternate Furrow
irrigation,
Sugarcane-Ratoon- Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat Mulching in
sugarcane
Wheat
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation Crop/cropping system Implementation
Limited Upland sandy Rice (Basmati)-Wheat Rice (Basmati)-Wheat Follow alternate
release of loamy soils Sorghum/ Maize- Sorghum/ Maize- Potato/Wheat wetting and drying
water in schedule of irrigation
Potato/Wheat
canals due to in rice,
Sugarcane +cucurbits – Sugarcane +cucurbits –Ratoon-
low rainfall Alternate Furrow
Ratoon-Wheat Wheat irrigation,
Mulching in
Sugarcane/
maize
Lowland clay Rice-wheat Rice-wheat Follow alternate Supply of inter cultural
loamy soils Fodder Sorghum Wheat Sorghum Fodder-Wheat wetting and drying implements through
schedule of irrigation RKV
Sugarcane-Ratoon- Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat
in rice,
Wheat
Alternate Furrow
irrigation,
13
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping systemh Implementationj
systemg
Non release Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice Limited irrigation, Seed through KSSC
of water in irrigated canal sandy Sorghum/Maize Pearl millet / Pigeonpea/ Alternate furrow and NFSM,
canals under loamy soils Blackgram irrigation, Supply of inter
delayed onset Drip irrigation, cultural implements
Sugarcane Sugarcane
of monsoon in Mulching through RKVY
+cucurbits
catchment
Lowland tube well Rice Pearl millet/ Blackgram/ Limited irrigation,
irrigated canal clay Greengram Alternate furrow
loam soils Sorghum Fodder Pearl millet/Sorghum Fodder irrigation,
Drip irrigation,
Sugarcane + Sugarcane
Mulching
cucurbits
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
Lack of
inflows into Not Applicable
tanks due to
insufficient
/delayed onset
of monsoon
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping systemh measuresi Implementationj
systemg
Insufficient Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice Limited irrigation, Seed through KSSC and
groundwater irrigated canal sandy /Vegetables (Tomato, Alternate furrow NFSM,
recharge due loam soil Brinjal, cucrbits etc) irrigation, Harvesting and threshing
to low rainfall Sorghum/Maize Pearl millet Drip irrigation, implements through
/Pigeonpea/Blackgram Mulching, RKVY
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane Micro/drip/sprinkler
irrigation under govt.
Lowland tube well Rice Pearl Limited irrigation
schemes,
irrigated canal clay millet/Blackgram/Greengram Alternate furrow
Supply of inter cultural
loam soil Sorghum Fodder Pearl millet/Sorghum Fodder irrigation
14
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping systemh measuresi Implementationj
systemg
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane Drip irrigation implements through
Mulching RKVY
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
span leading to water logging
Maize + Blackgram / Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place &
/cucurbits Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
maturity stage early as possible
Sugarcane Provide drainage Drain out excess water and Supply to sugar mills
harvest the lodged crop as /crusher as early as
early as possible possible or shift to safer
place and cover the cane
with trash materials
Blackgram or Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water Safe storage against
Harvesting at physiological storage pest and disease
maturity stage.
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking of vegetables at Shift to safer place &
physiological maturity stage dispose of produce as
early as possible
Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place &
Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
maturity stage and picking of early as possible
cucurbits crop.
Brinjal Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking at physiological Shift to safer place &
maturity stage dispose of produce as
early as possible
Tomato Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking at physiological Shift to safer place &
15
maturity stage dispose of produce as
early as possible
Mango - - Spray of 2% urea + -
Carbendazim 0.02% solution
Guava - - Spray of 2% urea + -
Carbendazim 0.02% solution
Heavy rainfall with high speed
winds in a short span2
Earthing up Drain out excess water and Supply to sugar mills
Sugarcane Tying harvest the lodged crop as /crusher as early as
early as possible possible or shift to safer
place and cover the cane
with trash materials
Maize/Sorghum Provide drainage Provide drainage, Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place &
Use Wind breaks Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
maturity stage early as possible
Blackgram/ Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage, Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place &
Use Wind breaks Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
maturity stage early as possible
Rice basmati Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place &
Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
maturity stage early as possible
Pigeonpea Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place &
Sowing on raised Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
bed maturity stage early as possible
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water Shift to safer place &
Sowing on raised ,Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
bed maturity stage early as possible
Brinjal Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water Shift to safer place &
Sowing on raised ,Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
16
bed maturity stage early as possible
Tomato Provide drainage, Provide drainage, Drain out excess water Shift to safer place &
Sowing on raised Use Wind breaks, ,Harvesting at physio- dispose of produce as
bed, Stacking logical maturity stage early as possible
Stacking Stacking
Cauliflower Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place &
Sowing on raised Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
bed maturity stage early as possible
Cucurbits Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place &
Sowing on raised Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
bed maturity stage early as possible
Mango Use Wind breaks Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray -
Guava Use Wind breaks Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray -
Outbreak of pests and diseases due
to unseasonal rains
Rice basmati Need based plant Need based plant Do not use strong pesticide Shift to safer place &
Sugarcane protection IPDM for protection IPDM for at maturity stage dispose of produce as
Rice/pluses Rice/pluses early as possible
Sorghum (fodder)
Blackgram/ Greengram
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra Need based plant Need based plant Do not spray strong Shift to safer place &
Brinjal protection IPDM for protection IPDM for pesticide at maturity stage dispose of produce as
Rice/pluses Rice/pluses early as possible
Tomato
Cucurbits
Cauliflower
2.3 Floods
17
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation
Rice (basmati) • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised
bed
Sugarcane • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Sorghum fodder • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Blackgram/ Greengram • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Pigeonpea • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised produce as early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised produce as early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised produce as early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Continuous submergence Shift to safer place & dispose of
for more than 2 days produce as early as possible
Rice • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised
18
bed
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised produce as early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised produce as early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised produce as early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Mango • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised produce as early as possible
bed
• Re transplanting
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone/Fog
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measurer
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice Basmati Re sowing of nursery Irrigation interval should be Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent
Light and frequent irrigation decreased decreased irrigation
during night
Sugarcane Mulching Irrigation interval should be Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent
decreased decreased irrigation
Sorghum fodder Re sowing Irrigation interval should be Irrigation interval should be Make silage
decreased decreased
Blackgram Re sowing Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Pod picking
/Greengram Mulching
19
Pigeonpea Re sowing Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Pod picking
Mulching
Horticulture
Okra Re sowing of nursery Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting of fruits
Re transplanting
Mulching
Light watering during night
Brinjal Re sowing of nursery Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting of fruits
Re transplanting
Mulching
Light watering during night
Tomato Re sowing of nursery Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting of fruits
Re transplanting
Mulching of nursery beds
Light irrigation during night
Mango Spray of water Spray of water Spray of water
Guava Spray of water Spray of water Spray of water
Cold waveq
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation
Sugarcane Light irrigation for survival -- Harvesting of cane
Horticulture
Tomato Light Sprinkler irrigation Light Sprinkler irrigation Harvesting of fruits
Pea Light Sprinkler irrigation Light Sprinkler irrigation Harvesting of fruits
Potato Light Sprinkler irrigation -- Harvesting
Frost
Sugarcane Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Harvesting of cane
Pigeonpea Grow as inter crop,,, Light irrigation, Light irrigation, Exposure of crop to smoke
Exposure of crop to smoke by Exposure of crop to smoke Exposure of crop to smoke by by burning waste material
burning waste material during by burning waste material burning waste material during during night time
night time during night time night time
20
Horticulture
Potato Light irrigation for survival, Light irrigation for survival, Light irrigation for survival, Harvesting
Exposure of crop to smoke by Exposure of crop to smoke Exposure of crop to smoke by
burning waste material during by burning waste material burning waste material during
night time during night time night time
Tomato Light irrigation for survival, Light irrigation for survival, Light irrigation for survival,
Exposure of crop to smoke by Exposure of crop to smoke Exposure of crop to smoke by
burning waste material during by burning waste material burning waste material during
night time during night time night time
Pea Light irrigation for survival, Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival, Harvesting
Exposure of crop to smoke by Exposure of crop to smoke Exposure of crop to smoke by
burning waste material during by burning waste material burning waste material during
night time during night time night time
Mango Irrigation Irrigation Irrigation --
Guava Irrigation Irrigation Irrigation Harvesting
Hailstorm
All the crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Horticulture
All the Vegetable Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
crops
All the Fruit crops Use anti hail net, Use anti hail net, Use anti hail net, Harvest the damaged fruits
Spray of fungicide with 2% Spray of fungicide with 2% Spray of fungicide with 2% Spray of fungicide with
urea solution urea solution urea solution 2% urea solution
Fog
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
21
Feed and fodder • Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
availability • Making of feed blocks trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for • Cultivation of fast growing
small ruminant.
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands green fodder crops.
for cultivating perennial fodder (Napier • Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, feed • Development of drought
blocks & mixture etc.
grass, Subabul), specially on bunds and resistance fodder.
wasteland • Migration of herd /flock to other places. • Increase the no. of Fodder
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging • Establishment of communication and Banks for future use.
fodder crops in irrigated area linkage with other state agencies.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability
and requirement should be updated by the
concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of drought
resistant crops and their varieties of fodder
crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler
irrigation system.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long term
storage of feed and fodder.
Drinking water • Preserving water in the pond/tank for • Using preserved water in the tanks for • Recharge of well/
drinking purpose.
drinking
Tanks etc.
• Excavation of bore well/creation of tanks or • Available ground water should be used
ponds.
for drinking on priority basis.
• De-silting of village ponds on regular basis
and adopt water harvesting techniques
through water shed approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube well
water during lean period.
Health and disease • Farmers should be encouraged to avail • Availing insurance benefits.
management Livestock insurance
• Conduction mass animal health camp and • Followed standard
• Training to livestock owners regarding treating the effected animals. Livestock management
natural calamities. • Mass campaigning though different media practices.
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and regarding possible outbreak of diseases and • Proper health care &
vaccines. their management. treatment.
• Vaccination
22
Floods
Feed and fodder • Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
availability • Making of feed blocks tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. • Cultivation of fast growing
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands • Use of feed mixture/block hay etc green fodder crops
for cultivating perennial fodder (Napier • Migration of flock /herds
grass, Subabul), specially on bunds and • Establishment of communication and
wasteland
linkage with other state agencies
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging
fodder crops.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder and
that should be stored on up land.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability
and requirement should be updated by the
concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of crops
and their varieties of fodder crops for water
logged conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long term
storage of feed and fodder.
Drinking water • Making suitable provision for safe drinking • Contaminated flood water should not be • Open sources of drinking
surface water including excavation of bore used for drinking. water (tank/well ) should
well/hand pump (India mark—II) at be further treated with
community level. potassium permagnate.
• Make farmers aware not to use
contaminated/ flood water for drinking
purpose.
23
Health and disease • Live stock Insurance • Conduction mass animal health camp and • Culling sick animals
management • Training to livestock owners regarding treating the effected animals. • Availing insurance
natural calamities. • Training to livestock owners regarding benefits.
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and natural calamities. • Culling unproductive
vaccines. • Establishment of Co-ordination with other livestock
• Vaccination Agencies. • Proper disposal of corpse
• Use of mass media to spread expat advice of dead bodies to prevent
the spread of contagious
diseases.
Cyclone Not Applicable
Heat wave and
cold wave
Shelter/environme • Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in the • Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins/ rags in • Repair and maintenance
nt management animal shed the animal sheds to protect against direct of additional facilities
• Create adequate sources for additional entry of hot/ cold waves
supply of water to protect the animals from • Provide proper bedding to prevent from
heat waves. cold and proper ventilation to prevent from
• Establishment of modern shelter sheds. heat.
• As far as possible grow shade trees such as • Provide drinking water to animal
frequently during heat wave
Neem, Pilkhan, Karanj etc near the animal
sheds. • Watch the forecast of weather department.
• Make provision for adequate no. of • As for as possible the animal should be
fans/coolers /heaters according to the allowed to wallow in pounds/ canals/ river
situation, if possible
or give bath once or twice in a day during
heat waves
Health and disease • Insure the animals • Organize village level animal health camps • Proper after care of animals.
management
• Training to livestock owners/ para-vets • Consult veterinary officer immediately if • Availing insurance benefits.
regarding preventive measure against any adverse symptoms are noticed • Proper disposal of corpse of
extreme weather conditions • Use of ITKs for food supplements dead bodies to prevent the
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and spread of contagious
vaccines etc. diseases.
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold
s based on forewarning wherever available
24
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkag
es with ongoing
Suggested contingency measures programs, if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed • Making and storage of feed • Use of feed concentrates/ • Availing insurance
ingredients concentrates mixture/blocks etc • Increase the no. of feed
• Awareness regarding traditional • Establishment of banks for future use
feed banks.
communication with other state
• Feed requirement data should be agencies.
generated • Use of locally available
• Prepare the feed requirement feed recourses.
data base of poultry farm. • Import the feed recourse
• Store the feed ingredients form other states.
Drinking water • Making extra facility for • Frequent supply of drinking
drinking water. water
• Repair & maintenance of water
resources
Health and • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of affected poultry • Culling of flock
disease medicines and vaccines. birds • Availing insurance benefits
management
• Vaccination • Proper disposal of corpse of
• Training to poultry dead bodies to prevent the
pared of contagious diseases
Growers regarding natural
calamities.
Floods
25
Shortage of feed • Sufficient quantity • Use of stored feed in • Cleaning of feed store &
ingredients of feed ingredients should be balanced form repair if any.
stored • Prevent the feed from • Moist feed should be dried
moisture. & treated as per
requirement
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water • Use only Ground water • Repair, maintenance
for drinking obtained from India Mrka II or and cleaning of water
Tubewell resource
• Sanitation of open
Wells
Health and • Veterinary preparedness with • Migration of flock if required • Availing insurance benefits.
disease medicines and vaccines • Culling of unproductive
management
• Vaccination flock
Cyclone Not Applicable
Shortage of feed • Storage and making of feed • Establishment of • Repair and maintenance of
ingredients concentrates communication with other feed store
• Proper feed requirement data state agencies
base • Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other
areas
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water • Use only Ground water • Repair and maintenance of
for drinking obtained from India Mrka II or water resource
Tubewell
Health and • Training to poultry growers • Treatment of injured poultry • Culling of flock
disease regarding natural calamities. birds. • Availing insurance benefits.
management
• Veterinary preparedness with • Proper disposal of corpse of
medicines and vaccines.
dead bodies to prevent the
pared of contagious diseases.
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environ • Making sufficient provision of • Keep the birds in appropriate • Making of modern shelter
ment shelter to protect live stock from shelter sheds
26
management heat and cold waves • Provide proper bedding to • Increase the plantation of trees
• Establishment of alternate prevent from cold and proper
ventilated to prevent from heat
resource for water supply.
• Modern shelter sheds. • Provide drinking water to birds
frequently.
• Adopted proper management
practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
Health and • Insurance • Provide proper treatment as • Availing insurance benefits
disease • Veterinary preparedness with per requirement • Culling of unproductive flock
management
medicines and vaccines • Treatment of injured poultry • Proper disposal of corpse of
• Training to poultry growers dead bodies to prevent the
regarding natural calamities pared of contagious diseases
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine _ _ _
Inland
(i) Shallow water depth due to • Adopt appropriate measures to • Harvest the crop partially • Re stock
insufficient rains/inflow reduce water seepage or
infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Regular observation to check the • Add oxy-flow to improve • Maintain appropriate level of water
oxygen if possible
water quality and remove the
pollutants if any. • Churning of pond water • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any.
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Adopt appropriate measures to • Ensure the Oxygen availability • Maintain appropriate level of water
27
insufficient rains/inflow reduce water seepage or into ponds for the survival of in ponds
infiltration from ponds fish • Check the water quality and
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution • Avoid any kind of water remove the pollutants if any.
and maintain water pH pollution
• Add oxy-flow to improve
oxygen into ponds.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in • Add some fresh water from other • Add oxy-flow to improve • Add fresh water into pond for
ponds / change in water quality source like cannel etc oxygen into ponds. life saving and to reduce salt
• Churning of pond water load
• Add fresh water into pond for • Maintain appropriate level of
life saving and to reduce salt water in ponds
load • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any.
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged • Boats, nets etc should be taken out • Close supervision of flood • Damaged boat or nets should be
from water bodies condition repaired
• Repair the damaged house.
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _
• Sanitation and proper disposal of
(iii) Loss of stock _ _
corpse
• Increase the height of bunds.
(iv) Changes in water quality -- --
• Treatment if possible
(v) Health and diseases -- --
B. Aquaculture
(i) Inundation with flood • Repair the bunds to prevent the • Avoid inflow of flood water • Repair the damaged bunds
water inflow of water from outside. • Check water quality
• If inflow water is not polluted • If inflow water is not polluted • Change the water if it is polluted
then place the net at inlet and that can be permitted to flow
outlet through net placed at inlet and
• Raise the height of bunds outlet of pond.
• Plan a proper drainage system • Fencing of net required in case
of overflow to avoid the
at farm
migration of fish
• Plantation of soil binding plants
28
at bund
(ii) Water contamination and • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Stop inflow of contaminated • Maintain appropriate level of
water in ponds
changes in water quality water
• Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any.
(iii) Health and diseases • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Diagnostic measures and • Limeing and medication as per
• Vaccination provide appropriate medicines requirement
• Use Cifex to control ulcerative
syndromes
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs • Marketable stock should be sold • Immediately remove the dead • After sanitation add new stock
(feed, chemicals etc) fishes from ponds and do
sanitation
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Dommageable infrastructures • Do not supplié Electric in • Repaire and service the damage
aerators, huts etc) should be secured flood éd area infrastructure
3. Cyclone / Tsunami Not Applicable
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
B. Aquaculture
• Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of
i) Changes in pond environment
water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m water in ponds ie. 1.75m in water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m
(water quality)
deep ponds 2m deep ponds deep ponds
• Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any
Ii ) Health and Disease management • Limeing@300kg/ha • Medication as per requirement • Remove the dead fishes from
ponds and add new stocks to
compensate the production
29