State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Ghaziabad
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Northern Plain (And Central Highlands) Including Aravallis, Hot Semi-Arid Eco-Region (4.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) Upper Gangetic Plain Region (V)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Western Plain Zone (UP-3)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Zone* Muzaffarnagar, Bagpat, G.B.Nagar and Bulandshahr, Meerut.
(*>50% area falling in the zone)
Geographic coordinates of district headquarters Latitude Longitude Altitude
280 39’ 48.689”N 770 25’ 48.838”E 209 Mt
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ ZARS/
RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with address K.V.K., Ordinance Factory (Chitood Gate), Pursi Muradnagar, Ghaziabad of S.V.P.U.A.&T,
Meerut - 250110
Name and address of the nearest Agromet Field Unit Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel Univ of Agriculture & Technology, Modipuram,
(AMFU, IMD) for agro-advisories in the Zone Meerut-250110, Uttar Pradesh
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number) ( specify week and month) (specify week and month)
SW monsoon (June-Sep) 599 23 3rd week of June 2nd week of September
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec) 31 7 3rd week of December 2nd week of January
Winter (Jan- March) 66 9 - -
Summer (Apr-May) 24 4 - -
Annual 720 43 - -
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural use Misc. land
statistics) tree
crops
and
groves
Area (‘000 ha) 206.934 143.930 3.542 38.951 0.086 2.929 0.185 4.091 8.915 4.305
1. Major Soils Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total
4
1. Sandy loams 37.43 26%
2. Loams 61.89 43%
3. Clay loams 17.28 12%
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity %
Net sown area 143.930 158.52%
Area sown more than once 84.230
Gross cropped area 228.160
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 133.335
Gross irrigated area 94.777
Rainfed area 10.595
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
2
Canals 20.232 15.16%
Tanks 0.0 0%
Open wells 3.921 2.93%
Bore wells 109.182 81.84%
Lift irrigation schemes NIL - -
Micro-irrigation - -
Other sources (please specify) 0.058 0.043%
Total Irrigated Area 133.335
Pump sets
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils such as high levels of arsenic,
Department /Board) Block-8 fluoride, saline etc)
Over exploited Hapur 1 15.40 Not reported
Critical 2 - do
Semi- critical 2 -- do
Safe 3 - do
Wastewater availability and use - - do
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures of 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops cultivated Area (‘000 ha)
Kharif Rabi Summer
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Grand total
Rice _ _ 22.340 _ _ _ _ 22.340
Wheat _ _ _ _ _ 75.503 _ 75.503
3
Sugarcane _ _ _ _ _ 63.260 _ 63.260
Mustard _ _ _ 0.162 1.854 2.016 _ 2.016
Toria _ _ _ 5.999 _ 5.999 _ 5.999
Pulses 0.415 0.415 _ 0.432 0.432 0.125 0.975
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits Total Irrigated Rainfed
All Fruits (Major 20.732 9.165 11.567
Mango)
Horticulture crops - Total Irrigated Rainfed
Vegetables
All Vegetables Crops 29.815 27.657 2.158
Potato 0.705 _ _
Medicinal and Total Irrigated Rainfed
Aromatic crops
Cut Flowers(Gladiolus 0.875 0.875 _
& Marigold)
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Eucalyptus 0.245 _ 0.245
Poplar 1.267 1.267 _
Eg., industrial
pulpwood crops etc.
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 75.082 23.58 51.50
Bajra 23.072 5.82 17.25
Barseem 12.586 12.586 _
Maize 2.241 2.241 _
Total fodder crop 112.981 44.227 68.75
area
4
Grazing land 0.028 _ 0.028
Sericulture etc
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding) 16.162 106.362 122.524
Improved cattle
Crossbred cattle 9.544 47.159 56.703
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) 83.064 332.264 415.328
Descript Buffaloes 35.599 142.398 177.998
Goat 16.403 36.085 52.488
Sheep(India+Exotic) 0.490 0.643 1.133
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak etc.) 650.850
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial 0 0
Backyard 19.573+12.522 = 32.095
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage facilities
Fisheries Department) (Ice plants etc.)
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake &
Gill nets) trap nets)
_ _ _ _ _ _
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
- 05/68.595ha 657/642.46ha
B. Culture
5
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000 tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) _ _ 45.5Mt
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department) 0.27 0.2151
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years: 2008-09)
1.11 Name of crop Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
residue as
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
fodder (‘000
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
Rice 61.368 2747 _ _ _ _ 61.368 2747 32.245
Wheat _ _ 303.975 4026 _ _ 303.975 4026 364.76
Sugarcane _ _ 332.440 525514 _ _ 332.440 525514 63.345
Mustard _ _ 2.228 1105 _ _ 2.228 1105 _
Toria _ _ 5.810 969 _ _ 5.810 969 _
Pulses 0.177 852 0.100 426 _ _ 0.277 412 0.075
Major Horticultural crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
All Fruits 211.990
All 588.757
Vegetables
Potato 17.622
Flowers 0.810
1.12 Sowing window for 5
major field crops Rice Wheat Sugar cane Pigeonpea Mustard
Kharif- Rainfed June-July
6
Kharif-Irrigated June-July March-May April-June
Rabi- Rainfed October
Rabi-Irrigated November-December October-November October-November
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Flood
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √
Cold wave √
Frost √ √
Sea water intrusion
Sheath blight,BPH, Pyrilla etc. √
Fog √
1.14 Include Digital maps of Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure II Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure III Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
Annexure II
9
Annexure III
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded
2. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty soils
3. Deep, fine soils moderately saline and sodic associated with loamy soils,
slightly eroded
4. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils slightly
saline and slightly sodic
5. Deep, loamy soils, moderate salinity and sodicity associated with loamy
soils with moderate salinity and strong sodicity
6. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils with
moderate salinity and sodicity and moderate water logging.
Old Alluvial plain with river left out channels/Oxbows/point bars (1-3%slope)
7. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with stratified loamy
soils slightly eroded
Recent Alluvial Plain (1-3% slope)
8. Deep, loamy soils and moderately saline and sodic
Active Flood Plain (1-3% slope)
9. Deep, sandy soils with moderate flooding associated with stratified loamy
soils and slight flooding
10
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Change in crop / cropping systemc Agronomic measuresd Remarks on
drought situationa systemb including variety Implementatione
(delayed onset)
Delay by 2 Deep soil, yellow Maize/ Sorghum/ Bajra/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, Azad • Conservation furrow -
weeks colored alluvial Pigeonpea utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga 2,11 • Inter-cultivation
loam soils Samrat etc • Sowing with multi seed
4th week of June Sorghum: CSH 14, 16, CSB 13, 15, SPB drill
1338 etc • Wider spacing for
Bajra: Raj-171, WCC-75, Pusa 23, 322, pigeonpea
ICMH-451 etc.
Pigeonpea: UPAS 120, ICPL 151,
Pusa 33 etc.
Delay by 4 Deep soil, yellow Maize/ Bajra/ Til/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, Azad • Conservation furrow • Linkage under
weeks colored alluvial Blackgram utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga 2,11 • Inter-cultivation RKVY for
loam soils Samrat etc • Sowing with multi seed supply of seed
2nd week of July Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322 drill drills
icmh-451 • Supply of seed
Til: Pergati, shekar, TA-78, TA-12 through govt.
Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1, Pant programmes ie.
U-30, 19, 35 etc NFSM,RKVY
• Re-scheduling
of canal
calendar
Delay by 6 Deep soil, yellow Blackgram/Mungbean / Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1, Pant • Sowing with multi seed
weeks colored alluvial Toria/ Bajra U-30, 19, 35 drill
loam soils
4th week of July Mungbean: PantGreengram -2, 3,
Narender mung -1, 4, SML-668, PDM-11
Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322
icmh-451
11
Delay by 8 Deep soil, yellow Toria Toria: P.T.-30, 507, 303, Bhawani, T-9 • Conservation furrow • Seed-drill
weeks colored alluvial • Inter-cultivation under RKVY
loam soils • Sowing with multi seed Supply of
2nd week of drill seed through
August govt.
agencies ie.
NFSM
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
season situationa system moisture conservation Implementation
drought measures
(Normal
onset)
Normal Upland (Irrigated) Rice/ Sugarcane/ 1. Thining, weeding and gap filling in • Inter cultivation • Supply of inter
onset Blackgram/ existing crop. • Conservation cultural implements
followed 2. Re sowing furrow through RKVY
Greengram/ Sorghum
by 15-20 3. Selection/nursery sowing of short • Thinning and weeding • Farm ponds through
(Fodder)
days dry duration rice cultivar • Mulching IWSM programme
spell after • Pulse crop seeds
sowing supply through NFSM
leading to
poor Un irrigated upland Maize/ Sorghum/ Gap filling • Inter cultivation
germinatio Pigeonpea/Greengram • Conservation
n/crop
furrow
stand etc. Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Bajra/ • Thinning and weeding
lowland Blackgram • Mulching
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping systemb Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
drought (long Farming moisture Implementation
dry spell, situationa conservation
consecutive 2 measures
weeks rainless
12
(>2.5 mm)
period)
Upland Rice/ Sugarcane/ Blackgram/ Thining & weeding • Inter cultivation • Supply of inter cultural
At vegetative (irrigated) Greengram/ Sorghum (Fodder) Postponement of top dressing of • Conservation implements through
stage Urea furrow RKVY
Life saving irrigation • Thinning and weeding • Farm ponds through
• Mulching IWSM programme
• Pulse crop seeds
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ supply through NFSM
upland Pigeonpea/Greengram • Micro/drip/sprinkler
irrigation under govt.
schemes
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Bajra
lowland
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping systemb Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
drought Farming moisture Implementation
(long dry situationa conservation
spell) measures
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Blackgram/ 1. Thining, weeding and gap • Conservation • Farm ponds through
At upland Greengram/ Sorghum (Fodder) filling in existing crop. furrow IWSM programme
flowering/ 2.Life saving irrigation • Thinning and
fruiting 3. Weeding and weed mulching weeding
stage • Mulching
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum (Fodder)
• Urea spray or
lowland
KCL spray
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Pigeonpea/Greengram
upland
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Bajra
lowland
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping systemb Crop management Rabi crop planning Remarks on Implementation
Farming
situationa
Terminal Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Blackgram/ Life saving irrigation • Toria/mustard • Farm ponds through IWSM
13
drought upland Greengram/ Sorghum (Fodder) • Potato programme
(Early • Pea/Chickpea • Supply of seed through
withdrawal • Barseem/oat ISOPM
of monsoon) Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum (Fodder) Life saving irrigation • Land labeling • Harvesting and threshing
lowland
implements through RKVY
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Greengram/ Blackgram Picking harvesting of pods
• Supply of land lazer labeler
upland Harvest at physiological
through CLDP or RKVY
maturity stage /
Harvest as fodder
2.1.2 Drought Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on Implementation
Farming system system
situationf
Upland sandy Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- Bajra/Greengram/ Blackgram
loam soils Potato/ Wheat - Potato/ Wheat
Sugarcane +cucurbits –Ratoon- No change
Wheat
Lowland clay Rice-wheat Basmati rice -Wheat • Use short duration • Seed through KSSC and
loam soils Sorghum Fodder-Wheat Bajra-Wheat varieties e.g. NFSM
Rice: PS 4, 5, PB- • Adequate supply of
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change
1, PRH -10 electricity/diesel should be
Kanchan, Sweta, Navin, ensured by the Govt.
Surya agencies.
Bajra (Fodder): Wcc-
75,Raj-171,Pusa-23,Pusa-
322
• Light irrigation with tube
well water
• Follow alternate wetting
and drying schedule of
irrigation in rice
• Alternate
Furrow irrigation
14
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on Implementation
Farming system system
situationf
• Mulching in
sugarcane/Maize
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
Limited Upland sandy loam soils Rice (Basmati)-Wheat No change • Follow alternate Adequate supply of
release of Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- No change wetting and drying electricity/diesel should
water in schedule of irrigation be ensured by the Govt.
Potato/ Wheat
canals due in rice agencies.
Sugarcane +cucurbits –Ratoon- No change
to low Alternate furrow
rainfall Wheat irrigation
Mulching in
sugarcane/maize
Lowland clay loam soils Rice-wheat No change • Follow alternate • Supply of inter cultural
Sorghum fodder-Wheat No change wetting and drying implements through
schedule of irrigation RKV
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change
in rice • Adequate supply of
• Alternate electricity/ diesel should
Furrow irrigation be ensured by the Govt.
• Mulching in agencies.
sugarcane
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
Non release Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice • Limited irrigation • Seed through KSSC
of water in irrigated canal sandy Sorghum/Maize Bajra /Pigeonpea/Blackgram • Alternate Furrow and NFSM
canals under loam soil irrigation • Supply of inter cultural
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane
delayed • Drip irrigation implements through
onset of • Mulching RKVY
15
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
monsoon in Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengram • Limited irrigation • Seed through KSSC
catchment irrigated canal clay Sorghum fodder Bajra/Sorghum fodder • Alternate Furrow and NFSM
loam soil irrigation • Harvesting and
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane
• Drip irrigation threshing implements
• Mulching through RKVY
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
Lack of Not Applicable
inflows into
tanks due to
insufficient
/delayed
onset of
monsoon
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh measuresi Implementationj
Insufficient Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aeoabic Rice • Seed through KSSC and
groundwater irrigated canal sandy /Vegetables (Tomato, Brinjal, • Alternate Furrow NFSM
recharge due loam soil cucrbits etc) irrigation • Harvesting and threshing of
to low Sorghum/Maize Bajra /Pigeonpea/Blackgram • Drip irrigation implements through RKVY
rainfall Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane • Mulching
Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengram • Alternate Furrow • Seed through KSSC and
irrigated canal clay Sorghum fodder Bajra/Sorghum Fodder irrigation NFSM
loam soil • Drip irrigation • Micro/drip/sprinkler
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane
• Mulching irrigation under govt.
schemes
• Supply of inter cultural
implements through RKVY
16
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short span Vegetative stagek Flowering stagel Crop maturity stagem Post harvestn
leading to water logging
Maize + Blackgram / Greengram /cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose
physiological maturity stage of produce as early as
possible
Sugarcane Provide drainage Drain out excess water and harvest the
Supply to sugar mills /crusher
lodged crop as early as possible
as early as possible or shift to
safer place and cover the cane
with trash materials
Blackgram or Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Safe storage against storage
Drain out excess water Harvesting at
physiological maturity stage. pest and disease
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
of produce as early as
Picking of vegetables at physiological possible
maturity stage
Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
Drain out excess water & Harvesting of produce as early as
at physiological maturity stage and possible
picking of cucurbits crop.
Brinjal Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
of produce as early as
possible
Picking at physiological maturity stage
Tomato Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
of produce as early as
possible
Provide drainage Picking at physiological maturity stage
17
Mango - Spray of 2% urea + Carbendazim -
- 0.02% solution
Guava - Spray of 2% urea + Carbendazim
- 0.02% solution -
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in a short span
Drain out excess water and harvest the
Sugarcane lodged crop as early as possible
Supply to sugar mills /crusher
• Ear thing
as early as possible or shift to
• Tying safer place and cover the cane
with trash materials
Maize/Sorghum Provide drainage, Drain out excess water & Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage Use Wind breaks physiological maturity stage of produce as early as
possible
Blackgram/ Greengram Provide drainage, Shift to safer place & dispose
Use Wind breaks Drain out excess water & Harvesting of produce as early as
• Provide drainage at physiological maturity stage
possible
Rice basmati Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
Drain out excess water & Harvesting at of produce as early as
Provide drainage physiological maturity stage
possible
Pigeonpea Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage, Drain out excess water & Harvesting of produce as early as
Sowing on raised bed at physiological maturity stage
possible
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage, Drain out excess water ,Harvesting at of produce as early as
Sowing on raised bed physiological maturity stage
possible
Brinjal Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage, Drain out excess water ,Harvesting at of produce as early as
Sowing on raised bed physio-
possible
logical maturity stage
18
Tomato Provide drainage, Drain out excess water ,Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage, Use Wind breaks, physio- of produce as early as
Sowing on raised bed, Stacking logical maturity stage possible
Stacking Stacking
Cauliflower Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose
physio- of produce as early as
Provide drainage, logical maturity stage possible
Sowing on raised bed
Cucurbits Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at
Provide drainage, physio-
Shift to safer place & dispose
Sowing on raised bed logical maturity stage of produce as early as
possible
Mango Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use Wind breaks -
Guava Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use Wind breaks -
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to
unseasonal rains
Rice basmati Need based plant Need based plant Shift to safer place & dispose
Do not use strong pesticide at maturity
Sugarcane protection IPDM for protection IPDM for of produce as early as
Rice/pluses Rice/pluses stage possible
Sorghum fodder
Blackgram/ Greengram
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra Need based plant Do not use strong pesticide at Shift to safer place & dispose
Need based plant protection IPDM for of produce as early as
Brinjal maturity stage
protection IPDM for Rice/pluses possible
Tomato Rice/pluses
Cucurbits
19
Cauliflower
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice (basmati) • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Direct sowing of rice as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Sugarcane • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
as early as possible
Sorghum fodder • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
as early as possible
Blackgram/ greengram • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
as early as possible
Pigeonpea • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
as early as possible
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
20
• Re transplanting as early as possible
Continuous submergence Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
for more than 2 days2 as early as possible
Rice • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Direct sowing of rice as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Mango • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of produce
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone/Fog
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measurer
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wavep
Rice basmati • Re sowing of nursery • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased Light and frequent
• Light and frequent irrigation decreased irrigation
21
during night
Sugarcane • Mulching • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased Light and frequent
decreased irrigation
Sorghum fodder • Re sowing • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Make silage
decreased decreased
Blackgram /Greengram • Re sowing • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
• Mulching survival
Pigeonpea • Re sowing • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
• Mulching survival
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching of nursery beds
• Light irrigation during night
Mango • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water • -
Guava • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water • -
Cold waveq
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation
Sugarcane • Mulching • Light irrigation for -- • Harvesting of
survival cane
22
Horticulture
Tomato Provide shade by intercropping • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Harvesting of
fruits
Frost
Sugarcane • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Harvesting of
cane
Pigeonpea • Grow as inter crop • Light irrigation • Light irrigation Smoke at night
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Horticulture
Potato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Tomato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • De halming
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Pea • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Mango • Irrigation &Smoking during night • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night --
night
Guava • Irrigation &Smoking during night • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night Harvesting
night
Hailstorm
All the crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Horticulture
All the Vegetable crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Use anti hail net Use anti hail net Use anti hail net Harvest the damaged
All the Fruit crops Spray of fungicide with 2% urea Spray of fungicide with 2% urea Spray of fungicide with 2% urea fruits
solution solution solution Spray of fungicide with
2% urea solution
Fog
23
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
• Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
• Fodder crop Insurance trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for small • Cultivation of fast growing green
• Making of feed blocks ruminant. fodder crops.
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, feed • Development of drought
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, blocks & mixture etc. resistance fodder.
Feed and fodder Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland • Migration of herd /flock to other places. • Increase the no. of Fodder Banks
availability • Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder • Establishment of communication and linkage for future use.
crops in irrigated area
with other state agencies.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned
deptt.
• Seed production and development of drought
resistant crops and their varieties of fodder crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler irrigation
system.
• Training to the farmers and extension functionaries
for production and long term storage of feed and
fodder.
Drinking water • Preserving water in the pond/tank for drinking • Using preserved water in the tanks for drinking • Recharge of well/ Tanks
purpose. • Available ground water should be used for etc.
• Excavation of bore well/creation of tanks or ponds. drinking on priority basis.
24
• De-silting of village ponds on regular basis and
adopt water harvesting techniques through water
shed approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube well water
during lean period.
• Farmers should be encouraged to avail Livestock • Conduction mass animal health camp and
• Availing insurance benefits.
insurance treating the effected animals.
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Mass campaigning though different media • Followed standard Livestock
management calamities. regarding possible outbreak of diseases and their management practices.
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and management. • Proper health care & treatment.
vaccines.
• Vaccination
Floods
• Utilizing fodder from perennial
• Fodder crop Insurance tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. • Availing crop insurance
• Making of feed blocks • Use of feed mixture/block hay etc • Cultivation of fast growing green
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Migration of flock /herds fodder crops
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, • Establishment of communication and linkage
Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland with other state agencies
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder
Feed and fodder
crops.
availability
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder and that
should be stored on up land.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned
deptt.
• Seed production and development of crops and
their varieties of fodder crops for water logged
conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension functionaries
for production and long term storage of feed and
25
fodder.
• Contaminated flood water should not be used
• Open sources of drinking water
Drinking water for drinking.
(tank/well ) should be further
treated with potassium per
• Making suitable provision for safe drinking surface
magnate.
water including excavation of bore well/hand
pump (India mark—II) at community level.
• Make farmers aware not to use contaminated/ flood
water for drinking purpose.
Health and disease • Live stock Insurance • Conduction mass animal health camp and
management • Training to livestock owners regarding natural treating the effected animals. • Culling sick animals
calamities. • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Availing insurance benefits.
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and calamities. • Culling unproductive
vaccines. • Establishment of Co-ordination with other livestock
• Vaccination Agencies. • Proper disposal of corpse of
• Use of mass media to spread expat advice dead bodies to prevent the
spread of contagious diseases.
Cyclone Not Applicable
Heat wave and cold
wave
26
• Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins/ rags in the
animal sheds to protect against direct entry of
hot/ cold waves • Repair and maintenance of
• Provide proper bedding to prevent from cold and additional facilities
• Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in the animal
proper ventilation to prevent from heat.
shed
Shelter/environment • Provide drinking water to animal frequently
• Create adequate sources for additional supply of
management during heat wave
water to protect the animals from heat waves.
• Watch the forecast of weather department.
• Establishment of modern shelter sheds.
• As for as possible the animal should be allowed
• As far as possible grow shade trees such as
to wallow in pounds/ canals/ river or give bath
Neem, Pilkhan, Karanj etc near the animal sheds.
once or twice in a day during heat waves
• Make provision for adequate no. of fans/coolers
/heaters according to the situation, if possible
• Organize village level animal health camps
• Insure the animals
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners/ para-vets regarding • Consult veterinary officer immediately if any • Proper after care of animals.
management adverse symptoms are noticed
preventive measure against extreme weather • Availing insurance benefits.
conditions • Use of ITKs for food supplements
• Proper disposal of corpse of
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and dead bodies to prevent the
vaccines etc. spread of contagious diseases.
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold
27
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages with
Suggested contingency measures ongoing programs, if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
• Use of feed concentrates/
Shortage of feed mixture/blocks etc • Availing insurance
ingredients • Making and storage of feed • Establishment of • Increase the no. of feed
concentrates communication with other state
banks for future use
• Awareness regarding traditional feed agencies.
banks. • Use of locally available feed
• Feed requirement data should be recourses.
generated • Import the feed recourse form
• Prepare the feed requirement data base other states.
of poultry farm.
• Store the feed ingredients
• Making extra facility for drinking
Drinking water • Frequent supply of drinking water
water.
• Repair & maintenance of water
resources
• Culling of flock
Health and disease
management • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of affected poultry birds • Availing insurance
medicines and vaccines. benefits
• Vaccination • Proper disposal of corpse
of dead bodies to prevent
• Training to poultry
the pared of contagious
Growers regarding natural calamities. diseases
28
Floods
• Cleaning of feed store
Shortage of feed
& repair if any.
ingredients
• Use of stored feed in • Moist feed should be
balanced form dried &treated as per
• Sufficient quantity of • Prevent the feed from requirement
feed ingredients should be stored moisture.
• Repair,
maintenance and
cleaning of water
recourse
• Make provision of ground water for • Use only Ground water obtained • Sanitation of open
Drinking water drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell Wells
• Availing insurance
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with benefits.
management medicines and vaccines • Migration of flock if required • Culling of unproductive
• Vaccination flock
Not Applicable
Cyclone
Shortage of feed • Storage and making of feed • Establishment of communication • Repair and maintenance of
ingredients concentrates with other state agencies feed store
• Proper feed requirement data base • Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other areas
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water for • Use only Ground water obtained • Repair and maintenance of
drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell water recourse
Health and disease • Training to poultry growers regarding • Culling of flock
management natural calamities. • Treatment of injured poultry birds. • Availing insurance benefits.
• Veterinary preparedness with • Proper disposal of corpse of
29
medicines and vaccines. dead bodies to prevent the
pared of contagious diseases.
Heat wave and cold wave
• Keep the birds in appropriate shelter
• Making sufficient provision of shelter • Making of modern shelter
Shelter/environme to protect live stock from heat and • Provide proper bedding to prevent sheds
nt management cold waves from cold and proper ventilated to • Increase the plantation of
prevent from heat
• Establishment of alternate resource for trees
• Provide drinking water to birds
water supply.
frequently.
• Modern shelter sheds.
• Adopted proper management
practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
• Insurance • Provide proper treatment as per • Availing insurance benefits
requirement
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with • Culling of unproductive flock
management • Treatment of injured poultry
medicines and vaccines • Proper disposal of corpse of
• Training to poultry growers dead bodies to prevent the
regarding natural calamities pared of contagious diseases
2.5.2 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine _ _ _
Inland
30
(i) Shallow water depth due to • Adopt appropriate measures to • Harvest the crop partially • Re stock
insufficient rains/inflow
reduce water seepage or infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen
• Regular observation to check the
water quality and remove the • Churning of pond water • Maintain appropriate level of water if possible
pollutants if any. • Check the water quality and remove the
pollutants if any.
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Ensure the Oxygen availability
insufficient rains/inflow into ponds for the survival of
• Adopt appropriate measures to fish
reduce water seepage or infiltration • Avoid any kind of water
from ponds pollution • Maintain appropriate level of water in ponds
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution • Add oxy-flow to improve • Check the water quality and remove the
and maintain water pH oxygen into ponds. pollutants if any.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in • Add some fresh water from other • Add oxy-flow to improve
ponds / change in water quality source like cannel etc oxygen into ponds. • Add fresh water into pond for life saving and
• Churning of pond water to reduce salt load
• Add fresh water into pond for • Maintain appropriate level of water in ponds
life saving and to reduce salt • Check the water quality and remove the
load pollutants if any.
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
• Close supervision of flood
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged • Boats, nets etc should be taken out condition
from water bodies • Damaged boat or nets should be repaired
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _ • Repair the damaged house.
(iii) Loss of stock _ _ • Sanitation and proper disposal of corpse
31
(iv) Changes in water quality • Increase the height of bunds. -- --
(v) Health and diseases -- • Treatment if possible --
B. Aquaculture
• Repair the bunds to prevent the
inflow of water • Repair the damaged bunds
• Avoid inflow of flood water
• If inflow water is not polluted • Check water quality
from outside.
then place the net at inlet and
(i) Inundation with flood water outlet • If inflow water is not polluted • Change the water if it is polluted
that can be permitted to flow
• Raise the height of bunds
through net placed at inlet and
• Plan a proper drainage system at outlet of pond.
farm • Fencing of net required in case
• Plantation of soil binding plants of overflow to avoid the
at bund migration of fish
(ii) Water contamination and • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Stop inflow of contaminated • Maintain appropriate level of water in ponds
changes in water quality water • Check the water quality and remove the
pollutants if any.
(iii) Health and diseases • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Diagnostic measures and provide
• Vaccination appropriate medicines
• Limeing and medication as per requirement
• Use Cifex to control ulcerative syndromes
• Immediately remove the dead
• Marketable stock should be sold
fishes from ponds and do
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
sanitation • After sanitation add new stock
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Dommageable infrastructures • Do not supplié Electric in flood
aerators, huts etc) should be secured éd area • Repaire and service the damage infrastructure
3. Cyclone / Tsunami Not Applicable
32
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
B. Aquaculture
• Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of
water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m • Maintain appropriate level of water in ponds
(i) Changes in pond deep ponds deep ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m deep ponds
environment (water quality) • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and remove the
remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any pollutants if any
i) Health and Disease management • Limeing@300kg/ha • Medication as per requirement • Remove the dead fishes from ponds and add
new stocks to compensate
• the production
33