State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Hapur
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/ Ecological Zone
Agro-Ecological Sub Region(ICAR) Northern Plain, Hot Subhumib (Dry) Eco-Region (9.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) UPPER GANGETIC PLAIN REGION (V)
Agro-Climatic Zone (NARP) UP-2 Mid-western Plain Zone
List all the districts falling the NARP Zone* (^ 50% area
falling in the zone)
Geographical coordinates of district headquarters Latitude Longitude Altitude(mt)
28.45N 77.45E
Name and address of the concerned
ZRS/ZARS/RARS/RRS/RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with address Swami Kalyan Dav K.V.K. Begra M. Nagar of S.V.P.U.A.T Meerut
Name and address of the nearest Agromet Field S.V.P.U.A.T Meerut
Unit(AMFU,IMD)for agro advisories in the Zone
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF (mm) Normal Rainy Normal Onset N ormal Cessation
Days (Number) (Specify week and month) (Specify week and month)
SW monsoon (June-sep) 598.7 47 4th Week of June 3rd Week of Sep
Post monsoon (Oct-Dec) 31.5 12 - -
Winter (Jan-March) 66.2 13 - -
Pre monsoon (Apr-May) 23.8 7 - -
Annual 720.2 79 - -
1.3 Land use pattern Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
of the district area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
(Latest agricultural Misc.tree land
statistics) use crops and
groves
Area in (000 ha) 114.3 94.9 1.6 16.0 0.1 0.9 0.2 1.7 4.6 2.2
1.4 Major Soils Area(‘000 ha) Percent(%) of total
Sandy loam soils 24.7 26 %
Loam soils 40.8 43%
Clay loam soils 11.4 12%
1.5 Agricultural land use Area(‘000 ha) Cropping intensity (%)
Net sown area 87.0 164.9 %
Area sown more than once 56.5
Gross cropped area 143.6
1.6 Irrigation Area(‘000 ha)
Net irrigation area 87.0
Gross irrigated area 143.6
Rain fed area 0.01
Sources of irrigation(Gross Irr. Number Area(’000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Area)
Canals 12.6 8.7
Tanks 0
Open wells 0.2 0.1
Bore wells 130.7 91.2
Lift irrigation schemes NA
Micro-irrigation NA
Other sources 0
Total Irrigated Area 143.4
Pump sets NA
No. of Tractors NA
Groundwater availability and use* No of blocks- (%)area Quality of water
(Data source: State/ Central Ground Tehsils-
water Department/ Board)
Over exploited
Critical
Semi-critical
Safe
Waste water availability and use
Ground water quality
*over-exploited groundwater utilization> 100%; critical: 90-100%; semicritical:70-90%; safe:<70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & (As per latest figures 2011-12)
1.7 Major field crops cultivated Area(‘000 ha)
Kharif Rabi Summer Total
Irrigated Rain fed Total Irrigated Rain fed Total
Rice 21.4 0 21.4 0 0 0 0 21.4
Wheat 0 0 0 45.1 0 45.1 0 45.1
Maize 1.1 0 1.1 - - - - 1.1
Sugarcane 35.5 0 35.5 - -* - - 35.5
Potato - - - 3.8 0 3.8 - 3.8
Arhar 1.1 0 1.1 - - - - 1.1
1.8 Production and productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years)
1.7 Major field crops Area(‘000 ha)
cultivated
Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity residue
(‘000 T) (KG/HA) (‘000 T) (KG/HA) (‘000 T) (KG/HA) (‘000 T) (KG/HA) as fodder
(‘000
tons)
Rice 59.4 2774 - - - - 59.4 2774 NA
Wheat - - 201.5 4466 - - 201.5 4466 NA
Maize 2.3 2137 - - - - 2.3 2137 NA
Sugarcane 2253.0 63500 - - - - 2253.0 63500 NA
Potato - - 95.8 25357 - - 95.8 25357 NA
Arhar 0.8 711 - - - - 0.8 711 NA
1.12 Sowing window for 5 major field Rice Wheat Sugar cane Pigeonpea Mustard
crops
Kharif- Rainfed June-July
Kharif-Irrigated June-July March-May March-May
Rabi- Rainfed
November- October-November
Rabi-Irrigated December October-November
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Flood
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √
Cold wave √
Frost √ √
Sea water intrusion
Sheath blight,BPH, Pyrilla etc. √
Fog √
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought situation Cropping system including variety Implementation
(delayed onset)
Delay by 2 Deep soil, yellow Maize/ Sorghum/ Bajra/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, Azad • Conservation furrow -
weeks colored alluvial Pigeonpea utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga 2,11 Samrat • Inter-cultivation
loam soils etc • Sowing with multi
4th week of June Sorghum: CSH 14, 16, CSB 13, 15, SPB seed drill
1338 etc • Wider spacing for
Bajra: Raj-171, WCC-75, Pusa 23, 322, pigeonpea
ICMH-451 etc.
Pigeonpea: UPAS 120, ICPL 151,
Pusa 33 etc.
Delay by 4 Deep soil, yellow Maize/ Bajra/ Til/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, Azad • Conservation furrow • Linkage under
weeks colored alluvial Blackgram utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga 2,11 Samrat • Inter-cultivation RKVY for
loam soils etc • Sowing with multi supply of seed
2nd week of Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322 seed drill drills
July icmh-451 • Supply of seed
Til: Pergati, shekar, TA-78, TA-12 through govt.
Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1, Pant programmes
U-30, 19, 35 etc ie.
NFSM,RKVY
• Re-scheduling
of canal
calendar
Delay by 6 Deep soil, yellow Blackgram/Mungbean / Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1, Pant • Sowing with multi
weeks colored alluvial Toria/ Bajra U-30, 19, 35 seed drill
loam soils
4th week of July Mungbean: PantGreengram -2, 3,
Narender mung -1, 4, SML-668, PDM-11
Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322
icmh-451
Delay by 8 Deep soil, yellow Toria Toria: P.T.-30, 507, 303, Bhawani, T-9 • Conservation furrow • Seed-drill
weeks colored alluvial • Inter-cultivation under RKVY
loam soils • Sowing with multi Supply of
2nd week of seed drill seed
August through
govt.
agencies ie.
NFSM
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
drought situation Cropping system moisture conservation Implementation
(Normal onset) measures
Normal onset Upland (Irrigated) Rice/ Sugarcane/ 1. Thining, weeding and gap filling in • Inter cultivation • Supply of inter
followed by 15- Blackgram/ existing crop. • Conservation cultural implements
20 days dry spell 2. Re sowing furrow through RKVY
Greengram/ Sorghum
after sowing 3. Selection/nursery sowing of short • Thinning and • Farm ponds through
(Fodder)
leading to poor duration rice cultivar weeding IWSM programme
germination/crop • Mulching • Pulse crop seeds
stand etc. supply through
NFSM
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Gap filling • Inter cultivation
upland Pigeonpea/Greengram • Conservation
furrow
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Bajra/ • Thinning and
lowland Blackgram weeding
• Mulching
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
drought (long Farming moisture Implementation
dry spell, situation conservation
consecutive 2 measures
weeks rainless
(>2.5 mm)
period)
Upland Rice/ Sugarcane/ Blackgram/ Thining & weeding • Inter cultivation • Supply of inter
At vegetative (irrigated) Greengram/ Sorghum (Fodder) Postponement of top dressing of • Conservation cultural implements
stage Urea furrow through RKVY
Life saving irrigation • Thinning and • Farm ponds through
weeding IWSM programme
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/
• Mulching • Pulse crop seeds
upland Pigeonpea/Greengram
supply through NFSM
• Micro/drip/sprinkler
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Bajra irrigation under govt.
lowland schemes
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
drought Farming moisture Implementation
(long dry situation conservation
spell) measures
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Blackgram/ 1. Thining, weeding and gap • Conservation • Farm ponds through
At upland Greengram/ Sorghum (Fodder) filling in existing crop. furrow IWSM programme
flowering/ 2.Life saving irrigation • Thinning and
fruiting 3. Weeding and weed mulching weeding
stage • Mulching
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum (Fodder)
• Urea spray or
lowland
KCL spray
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Pigeonpea/Greengram
upland
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Bajra
lowland
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Rabi crop planning Remarks on Implementation
Farming
situation
Terminal Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Blackgram/ Life saving irrigation • Toria/mustard • Farm ponds through IWSM
drought upland Greengram/ Sorghum (Fodder) • Potato programme
(Early • Pea/Chickpea • Supply of seed through
withdrawal • Barseem/oat ISOPM
of • Land labeling • Harvesting and threshing
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum (Fodder) Life saving irrigation
monsoon) implements through RKVY
lowland
• Supply of land lazer labeler
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Greengram/ Blackgram Picking harvesting of pods
through CLDP or RKVY
upland Harvest at physiological
maturity stage /
Harvest as fodder
2.1.2 Drought Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on Implementation
Farming system system
situation
Upland sandy Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- Bajra/Greengram/ Blackgram
loam soils Potato/ Wheat - Potato/ Wheat
Sugarcane +cucurbits – No change
Ratoon-Wheat
Lowland clay Rice-wheat Basmati rice -Wheat • Use short duration • Seed through KSSC and
loam soils Sorghum Fodder-Wheat Bajra-Wheat varieties e.g. NFSM
Rice: PS 4, 5, PB- • Adequate supply of
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change
1, PRH -10 electricity/diesel should be
Kanchan, Sweta, Navin, ensured by the Govt.
Surya agencies.
Bajra (Fodder): Wcc-
75,Raj-171,Pusa-
23,Pusa-322
• Light irrigation with
tube well water
• Follow alternate wetting
and drying schedule of
irrigation in rice
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on Implementation
Farming system system
situation
Alternate Furrow
irrigation
• Mulching in
sugarcane/Maize
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Limited Upland sandy loam Rice (Basmati)-Wheat No change • Follow alternate Adequate supply of
release of soils Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- No change wetting and drying electricity/diesel should
water in schedule of be ensured by the Govt.
Potato/ Wheat
canals due irrigation in rice agencies.
Sugarcane +cucurbits – No change
to low Alternate furrow
rainfall Ratoon-Wheat irrigation
Mulching in
sugarcane/maize
Lowland clay loam Rice-wheat No change • Follow alternate • Supply of inter cultural
soils Sorghum fodder-Wheat No change wetting and drying implements through
schedule of RKV
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change
irrigation in rice • Adequate supply of
• Alternate electricity/ diesel
Furrow irrigation should be ensured by
• Mulching in the Govt. agencies.
sugarcane
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Non release Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice • Limited irrigation • Seed through KSSC
of water in irrigated canal sandy Sorghum/Maize Bajra /Pigeonpea/Blackgram • Alternate Furrow and NFSM
canals under loam soil irrigation • Supply of inter cultural
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane
delayed • Drip irrigation implements through
onset of • Mulching RKVY
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
monsoon in Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengram • Limited irrigation • Seed through KSSC
catchment irrigated canal clay Sorghum fodder Bajra/Sorghum fodder • Alternate Furrow and NFSM
loam soil irrigation • Harvesting and
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane
• Drip irrigation threshing implements
• Mulching through RKVY
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Lack of
inflows into Not Applicable
tanks due to
insufficient
/delayed
onset of
monsoon
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
situation system system measures Implementation
Insufficient Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aeoabic Rice • Seed through KSSC and
groundwater irrigated canal sandy /Vegetables (Tomato, • Alternate Furrow NFSM
recharge loam soil Brinjal, cucrbits etc) irrigation • Harvesting and threshing
due to low Sorghum/Maize Bajra /Pigeonpea/Blackgram • Drip irrigation of implements through
rainfall Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane • Mulching RKVY
Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengram • Alternate Furrow • Seed through KSSC and
irrigated canal clay Sorghum fodder Bajra/Sorghum Fodder irrigation NFSM
loam soil • Drip irrigation • Micro/drip/sprinkler
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane
• Mulching irrigation under govt.
schemes
• Supply of inter cultural
implements through RKVY
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
span leading to water logging
Maize + Blackgram / Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose
/cucurbits at physiological maturity stage of produce as early as possible
Sugarcane Provide drainage Drain out excess water and harvest Supply to sugar mills /crusher
the lodged crop as early as possible as early as possible or shift to
safer place and cover the cane
with trash materials
Blackgram or Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water Harvesting at Safe storage against storage
physiological maturity stage. pest and disease
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking of vegetables at physiological Shift to safer place & dispose
maturity stage of produce as early as possible
Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose
at physiological maturity stage and of produce as early as possible
picking of cucurbits crop.
Brinjal Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking at physiological maturity Shift to safer place & dispose
stage of produce as early as possible
Tomato Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking at physiological maturity Shift to safer place & dispose
stage of produce as early as possible
Mango - - Spray of 2% urea + Carbendazim -
0.02% solution
Guava - - Spray of 2% urea + Carbendazim -
0.02% solution
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in a short span
• Ear thing Drain out excess water and harvest Supply to sugar mills /crusher
Sugarcane • Tying the lodged crop as early as possible as early as possible or shift to
safer place and cover the cane
with trash materials
Maize/Sorghum Provide drainage Provide drainage, Drain out excess water & Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose
Use Wind breaks at physiological maturity stage of produce as early as possible
Blackgram/ Greengram • Provide drainage Provide drainage, Drain out excess water & Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose
Use Wind breaks at physiological maturity stage of produce as early as possible
Rice basmati Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose
at physiological maturity stage of produce as early as possible
Pigeonpea Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose
Sowing on raised at physiological maturity stage of produce as early as possible
bed
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water ,Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose
Sowing on raised at physiological maturity stage of produce as early as possible
bed
Brinjal Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water ,Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose
Sowing on raised at physio- of produce as early as possible
bed logical maturity stage
Tomato Provide drainage, Provide drainage, Drain out excess water ,Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose
Sowing on raised Use Wind breaks, at physio- of produce as early as possible
bed, Stacking logical maturity stage
Stacking Stacking
Cauliflower Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose
Sowing on raised physio- of produce as early as possible
bed logical maturity stage
Cucurbits Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose
Sowing on raised physio- of produce as early as possible
bed logical maturity stage
Mango Use Wind breaks Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray -
Guava Use Wind breaks Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray -
Outbreak of pests and diseases due
to unseasonal rains
Rice basmati Need based plant Need based plant Do not use strong pesticide at Shift to safer place & dispose
Sugarcane protection IPDM for protection IPDM maturity stage of produce as early as possible
Rice/pluses for Rice/pluses
Sorghum fodder
Blackgram/ Greengram
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra Need based plant Need based plant Do not use strong pesticide at Shift to safer place & dispose
Brinjal protection IPDM for protection IPDM maturity stage of produce as early as possible
Rice/pluses for Rice/pluses
Tomato
Cucurbits
Cauliflower
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice (basmati) • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Sugarcane • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Sorghum fodder • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Blackgram/ greengram • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Pigeonpea • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Continuous submergence - - - Shift to safer place & dispose of
for more than 2 days
produce as early as possible
Rice • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Mango • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone/Fog
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measure
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice basmati • Re sowing of nursery • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent irrigation
• Light and frequent irrigation decreased decreased
during night
Sugarcane • Mulching • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent irrigation
decreased decreased
Sorghum fodder • Re sowing • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Make silage
decreased decreased
Blackgram • Re sowing • Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Pod picking
/Greengram • Mulching
Pigeonpea • Re sowing Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Pod picking
• Mulching
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching of nursery beds
• Light irrigation during night
Mango • Spray of water Spray of water Spray of water -
Guava • Spray of water Spray of water Spray of water -
Cold wave
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation
Sugarcane • Mulching Light irrigation for survival -- Harvesting of cane
Horticulture
Tomato Provide shade by intercropping • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light Sprinkler irrigation Harvesting of fruits
Frost
Sugarcane • Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Harvesting of cane
Pigeonpea • Grow as inter crop • Light irrigation • Light irrigation Smoke at night
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Horticulture
Potato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Tomato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • De halming
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Pea • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Mango • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during --
night night night
Guava • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during Harvesting
night night night
Hailstorm
All the crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Horticulture
All the Vegetable Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
crops
All the Fruit crops Use anti hail net Use anti hail net Use anti hail net Harvest the damaged fruits
Spray of fungicide with 2% urea Spray of fungicide with 2% Spray of fungicide with 2% Spray of fungicide with 2%
solution urea solution urea solution urea solution
Fog Not applicable
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
Drought
Feed and fodder • Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
availability • Making of feed blocks trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for small • Cultivation of fast growing
ruminant.
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for green fodder crops.
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, • Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, feed • Development of drought
blocks & mixture etc.
Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland resistance fodder.
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder • Migration of herd /flock to other places. • Increase the no. of Fodder
crops in irrigated area • Establishment of communication and Banks for future use.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder. linkage with other state agencies.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability
and requirement should be updated by the
concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of drought
resistant crops and their varieties of fodder
crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler irrigation
system.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long term
storage of feed and fodder.
Drinking water • Preserving water in the pond/tank for drinking • Using preserved water in the tanks for • Recharge of well/
purpose. drinking Tanks etc.
• Excavation of bore well/creation of tanks or • Available ground water should be used for
ponds. drinking on priority basis.
• De-silting of village ponds on regular basis
and adopt water harvesting techniques through
water shed approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube well water
during lean period.
Health and disease • Farmers should be encouraged to avail • Conduction mass animal health camp and • Availing insurance benefits.
management Livestock insurance treating the effected animals. • Followed standard Livestock
• Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Mass campaigning though different media management practices.
calamities. regarding possible outbreak of diseases and • Proper health care &
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and their management. treatment.
vaccines.
• Vaccination
Floods
Feed and fodder • Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
availability • Making of feed blocks tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. • Cultivation of fast growing
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Use of feed mixture/block hay etc green fodder crops
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, • Migration of flock /herds
Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland • Establishment of communication and
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder linkage with other state agencies
crops.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder and that
should be stored on up land.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability
and requirement should be updated by the
concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of crops and
their varieties of fodder crops for water logged
conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long term
storage of feed and fodder.
Drinking water • Making suitable provision for safe drinking • Contaminated flood water should not be • Open sources of drinking
surface water including excavation of bore used for drinking. water (tank/well ) should be
well/hand pump (India mark—II) at further treated with
community level. potassium per magnate.
• Make farmers aware not to use contaminated/
flood water for drinking purpose.
Health and disease • Live stock Insurance • Conduction mass animal health camp and • Culling sick animals
management • Training to livestock owners regarding natural treating the effected animals. • Availing insurance benefits.
calamities. • Training to livestock owners regarding • Culling unproductive
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and natural calamities. livestock
vaccines. • Establishment of Co-ordination with other • Proper disposal of corpse
• Vaccination Agencies. of dead bodies to prevent
• Use of mass media to spread expat advice
the spread of contagious
diseases.
Cyclone Not Applicable
Heat wave and
cold wave
Shelter/environme • Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in the • Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins/ rags in the • Repair and maintenance of
nt management animal shed animal sheds to protect against direct entry additional facilities
• Create adequate sources for additional of hot/ cold waves
supply of water to protect the animals from • Provide proper bedding to prevent from cold
heat waves. and proper ventilation to prevent from heat.
• Establishment of modern shelter sheds. • Provide drinking water to animal frequently
• As far as possible grow shade trees such as during heat wave
Neem, Pilkhan, Karanj etc near the animal • Watch the forecast of weather department.
sheds. • As for as possible the animal should be
• Make provision for adequate no. of allowed to wallow in pounds/ canals/ river or
fans/coolers /heaters according to the
give bath once or twice in a day during heat
situation, if possible
waves
Health and disease • Insure the animals • Organize village level animal health camps • Proper after care of animals.
management
• Training to livestock owners/ para-vets • Consult veterinary officer immediately if any • Availing insurance benefits.
regarding preventive measure against extreme adverse symptoms are noticed • Proper disposal of corpse of
weather conditions • Use of ITKs for food supplements dead bodies to prevent the
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and spread of contagious diseases.
vaccines etc.
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold
2.5.2 Poultry
Suggested contingency measures Convergence/linkages
with ongoing programs, if
any
Before the event During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed • Making and storage of feed • Use of feed concentrates/ • Availing insurance
ingredients concentrates mixture/blocks etc • Increase the no. of
• Awareness regarding traditional • Establishment of communication feed banks for future
feed banks.
with other state agencies.
use
• Feed requirement data should be • Use of locally available feed
generated
recourses.
• Prepare the feed requirement data • Import the feed recourse form
base of poultry farm.
other states.
• Store the feed ingredients
Drinking water • Making extra facility for drinking • Frequent supply of drinking water
water.
• Repair & maintenance of water
resources
Health and • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of affected poultry • Culling of flock
disease medicines and vaccines. birds • Availing insurance
management
• Vaccination benefits
• Training to poultry • Proper disposal of
Growers regarding natural
corpse of dead bodies
calamities.
to prevent the pared of
contagious diseases
Floods
Shortage of feed Sufficient quantity of feed • Use of stored feed in balanced • Cleaning of feed
ingredients ingredients should be stored form store & repair if any.
• Prevent the feed from moisture. • Moist feed should be
dried &treated as per
requirement
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water • Use only Ground water obtained • Repair,
for drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell maintenance and
cleaning of water
recourse
• Sanitation of open
Wells
Health and • Veterinary preparedness with • Migration of flock if required • Availing insurance
disease medicines and vaccines benefits.
management
• Vaccination • Culling of
unproductive flock
Cyclone Not Applicable
Shortage of feed • Storage and making of feed • Establishment of • Repair and maintenance
ingredients concentrates communication with other state of feed store
• Proper feed requirement data base agencies
• Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other areas
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water • Use only Ground water obtained • Repair and maintenance
for drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell of water recourse
Health and • Training to poultry growers • Treatment of injured poultry • Culling of flock
disease regarding natural calamities. birds. • Availing insurance
management
• Veterinary preparedness with benefits.
medicines and vaccines. • Proper disposal of corpse
of dead bodies to prevent
the pared of contagious
diseases.
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environm • Making sufficient provision of • Keep the birds in appropriate • Making of modern shelter
ent management shelter to protect live stock from shelter sheds
heat and cold waves • Provide proper bedding to • Increase the plantation of
• Establishment of alternate resource prevent from cold and proper trees
for water supply. ventilated to prevent from heat
• Modern shelter sheds. • Provide drinking water to birds
frequently.
• Adopted proper management
practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
Health and • Insurance • Provide proper treatment as per • Availing insurance
disease • Veterinary preparedness with requirement benefits
management
medicines and vaccines • Treatment of injured poultry • Culling of unproductive
• Training to poultry growers flock
regarding natural calamities • Proper disposal of corpse
of dead bodies to prevent
the pared of contagious
diseases
2.5.2 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine _ _ _
Inland
(i) Shallow water depth due to • Adopt appropriate measures to reduce • Harvest the crop partially • Re stock
insufficient rains/inflow
water seepage or infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen • Maintain appropriate level
of water if possible
• Regular observation to check the water • Churning of pond water • Check the water quality
quality and remove the pollutants if any.
and remove the pollutants
if any.
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Ensure the Oxygen availability into • Maintain appropriate level
insufficient rains/inflow • Adopt appropriate measures to reduce ponds for the survival of fish of water in ponds
water seepage or infiltration from ponds • Avoid any kind of water pollution • Check the water quality
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen into and remove the pollutants
and maintain water pH ponds. if any.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in • Add fresh water into
ponds / change in water quality pond for life saving and
• Add some fresh water from other source to reduce salt load
like cannel etc • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen into • Maintain appropriate
ponds. level of water in ponds
• Churning of pond water • Check the water quality
• Add fresh water into pond for life and remove the
saving and to reduce salt load pollutants if any.
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged • Boats, nets etc should be taken out from • Close supervision of flood condition • Damaged boat or nets
water bodies should be repaired
• Repair the damaged house.
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _
• Sanitation and proper
(iii) Loss of stock _ _
disposal of corpse
• Increase the height of bunds.
(iv) Changes in water quality -- --
• Treatment if possible
(v) Health and diseases -- --
B. Aquaculture
(i) Inundation with flood • Repair the bunds to prevent the inflow • Avoid inflow of flood water from • Repair the damaged
water of water outside. bunds
• If inflow water is not polluted then place • If inflow water is not polluted that can • Check water quality
the net at inlet and outlet be permitted to flow through net • Change the water if it is
• Raise the height of bunds placed at inlet and outlet of pond. polluted
• Plan a proper drainage system at farm • Fencing of net required in case of
overflow to avoid the migration of
• Plantation of soil binding plants at bund fish
(ii) Water contamination and • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Stop inflow of contaminated water • Maintain appropriate
level of water in ponds
changes in water quality
• Check the water quality
and remove the
pollutants if any.
(iii) Health and diseases • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Diagnostic measures and provide • Limeing and medication
• Vaccination appropriate medicines as per requirement
• Use Cifex to control
ulcerative syndromes
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed, • Marketable stock should be sold • Immediately remove the dead fishes • After sanitation add new
chemicals etc) from ponds and do sanitation stock
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Dommageable infrastructures should be • Do not supplié Electric in flood éd • Repaire and service the
aerators, huts etc) secured area damage infrastructure
3. Cyclone / Tsunami Not Applicable
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture -- -- --
B. Aquaculture
(i) Changes in pond
• Maintain appropriate level of water in • Maintain appropriate level of water • Maintain appropriate
ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m deep ponds in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m deep ponds level of water in ponds
environment (water quality)
• Check the water quality and remove the • Check the water quality and remove ie. 1.75m in 2m deep
ponds
pollutants if any the pollutants if any
• Check the water quality
and remove the
pollutants if any
i) Health and Disease management • Limeing@300kg/ha • Medication as per requirement • Remove the dead fishes
from ponds and add new
stocks to compensate
• the production