State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for the District: Jyotiba Phule Nagar
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Northern Plain, Hot Subhumib (Dry) Eco-Region (9.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) Upper Gangetic Plain Region (V)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Bhabar And Terai Zone (UP-2)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Zone* Pilibhit, Bareilly, Rampur, Bijnor, Moradabad, Shahjanpur, Badaun
(*>50% area falling in the zone)
Geographic coordinates of district headquarters Latitude Longitude Altitude
280 52’ 7”N 780 28’ 8”E 211 mt.
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ ZARS/
RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with Krishi Vigyan Kendra of S.V.P.U. A & T, J.P.Nagar
address
Name and address of the nearest Agromet Field S.V.P.U. A & T, Meerut
Unit (AMFU, IMD) for agro-advisories in the
Zone
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number) ( specify week and month) (specify week and month)
SW monsoon (June-Sep) 815 55 2nd week of June 3rd week of September
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec) 38 13 3rd week of December 2nd week of January
Winter (Jan- March) 66 15 - -
Summer (Apr-May) 23 7 - -
Annual 942 90 - -
1
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivabl fallows fallo
district (latest agricultural Misc. e ws
statistics) use tree land
crops and
groves
Area (‘000 ha) 216.846 172.181 21.001 16.769 0.196 0.904 0.280 1.047 2.818 1.650
1. 4 Major Soils Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%)
Sandy loam soils 35.77 25.16
Loamy soils 66.02 46.43
Clay loam soils 29.17 20.52
Silty loam soils 10.73 7.53
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity %
Net sown area 172.181 151.36%
Area sown more than once 88.424
Gross cropped area 260.605
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 130.632
Gross irrigated area 228.758
Rainfed area 41.549
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 0.063 0.04 %
Tanks - -
Open wells 65.928 50.47 %
Bore wells 64.641 49.48 %
Lift irrigation schemes - -
Micro-irrigation - -
2
Other sources 0 -
Total Irrigated Area 130.632
Pump sets
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils problem such as high levels of
Department /Board) Block-6 arsenic, fluoride, saline etc)
Over exploited - - Not reported
Critical 1 - do
Semi- critical 3 - do
Safe 2 - do
Wastewater availability and use - - do
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures of 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated Kharif Rabi
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer Grand total
Rice 26.586 - 26.506 - - - - 26.586
Maize - 3.028 3.028 - - - 1.002 4.030
Pigeon pea - 0.656 0.656 - - - - 0.656
Wheat - - - 94.217 - 94.217 - 94.217
Sugarcane - - - 76.851 - 76.851 - 76.851
Mustard - - - 1.956 1.538 3.494 - 3.494
Toria - - - 5.227 2.771 7.998 - 7.998
Lentil - - - - 1.342 1.342 - 1.342
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits Total Irrigated Rainfed
Mango 2.678 1.378 1.300
Guava 0.853 - 0.853
Others 0.526 0.526 -
Horticulture crops - Total Irrigated Rainfed
Vegetables
Potato 4.303 4.303 -
Cucurbits 5.587 5.587 -
Okra 0.873 0.873 -
3
Pea 1.232 1.232 -
Medicinal and Total Irrigated Rainfed
Aromatic crops
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Poplar 3.685 3.685 -
Eucaliptus 1.213 - 1.213
Eg., industrial pulpwood
crops etc.
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 54.463 32.562 21.901
Bajra 18.125 - 18.125
Barseem 3.542 3.542 -
Total fodder crop area 76.130 36.104 40.026
Grazing land 0.085 - 0.085
Sericulture etc - - -
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding) 47.940 148.173 196.113
Improved cattle
Crossbred cattle 20.492 48.109 68.601
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) 110.534 213.249 323.783
Descript Buffaloes 47.371 91.392 138.764
Goat 23.406 40.828 64.234
Sheep Indi + Exotic (459+75) 0.534 (962+111) 1.073 1.607
Camel, Pig, Yak etc 744.177
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial
Backyard (292.62+33.844=63.106)
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: Fisheries No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Department) facilities
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized (Ice
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake & plants
Gill nets) trap nets) etc.)
- - - - -
4
ii) Inland (Data Source: Fisheries No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Department)
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000
tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - -
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department)
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years: 2008-09 )
1.11 Name of crop Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
resid
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivit
ue as
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) y (kg/ha)
fodde
r
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
Rice 53.96 2029 - - - - 53.916 2029 51.84
Wheat - - 297.255 3155 - - 297.255 3155 357.0
6
Sugarcane - - 4797.039 62420 - - 4797.039 62420 719.5
5
Maize 2.605 860 - - 1.058 1056 3.663 909 4.671
mustard - - 3.256 932 - - 3.256 932 -
Pigeon pea 0.690 1052 - - - - 0.690 1052 0.099
Lentil - - 1.096 817 - - 1.096 817 1.258
Toria - - 7.342 918 - - 7.342 918 -
1.12 Sowing window for 5
Rice Wheat Pigeonpea Sugarcane Maize
major field crops
Kharif- Rainfed - - - - June
Kharif-Irrigated June - July - - October March -
April
5
Rabi- Rainfed - - June - -
Rabi-Irrigated - November - April - June March - April -
December
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Flood √
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √
Cold wave √
Frost √
Sea water intrusion √
Stem borer,Sheath blight, Pyrilla, White grub etc. √
Fog √
1.14 Include Digital maps of Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure II Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure III Enclosed: Yes
6
Annexure I
7
Annexure- II
8
Annexure III
SOILS OF JYOTIBA PHULE NAGAR DISTRICT (U.P.)
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded
2. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty soils
3. Deep, silty soils associated with loamy soils slightly eroded
Old Alluvial plain with river left out channels/Oxbows/point bars (1-3%slope)
4. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with stratified loamy
soils slightly eroded
Old Alluvial Plain with occasional sandunes (1-3%slope).
5. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy over sandy
soils and moderately eroded
Recent Alluvial Plain (1-3% slope)
6. Deep, loamy soils and moderately saline and sodic
Active Flood Plain (1-3% slope)
7. Deep, sandy soils with moderate flooding associated with stratified loamy
soils and slight flooding
9
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought Farming Cropping system including variety Implementation
(delayed situation
onset)
Delay by 2 Deep soil, Maize/ Sorghum/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, Azad Conservation furrow, Seed-drill under
weeks yellow colored Bajra/ Pigeonpea/ utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga 2,11 Inter-cultivation, RKVY,
alluvial loam Samrat etc Sowing with multi Supply of seed
4th week of soils Sorghum: CSH 14, 16, CSB 13, 15, seed drill, through govt.
June SPB 1338 etc Wider spacing for agencies ie. NFSM,
Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322 pigeonpea RKVY
ICMH-451
Pigeonpea: UPAS 120, ICPL 151,Pusa
33,
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought Farming Crop/cropping Implementation
(delayed situationa system
onset)
Delay by 4 Deep soil, Maize/ Bajra/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, Azad Conservation furrow, Seed-drill under
weeks yellow colored Til/Blackgram utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga 2,11 Inter-cultivation, RKVY,
alluvial loam Samrat etc Sowing with multi Supply of seed
2nd week of soils Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322 seed drill, through govt.
July ICMH-451 agencies ie. NFSM,
Til: Pergati, shekar, TA-78, TA-12 RKVY
Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1,
Pant U-30, 19, 35 etc
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought Farming Crop/cropping Implementation
situation system
Delay by 6 Deep soil, Blackgram/Greengram Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1, Sowing with multi
weeks yellow colored / Toria/ Bajra Pant U-30, 19, 35 Mungbean: seed drill
alluvial loam PantGreengram -2, 3, Narender mung -
4th week of soils 1, 4, SML-668, PDM-11
July
Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322
10
ICMH-451
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresd Remarks on
drought situationa systemc Implementatione
Delay by 8 Deep soil, Toria Toria: P.T.-30, 507, 303, Conservation furrow Seed-drill under RKVY
weeks yellow colored Bhawani, T-9 Inter-cultivation Supply of seed through govt.
2nd week of alluvial loam Sowing with multi seed drill agencies ie. NFSM
August soils
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Crop / Cropping Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought Farming system conservation measures Implementation
(Normal situationa
onset)
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Thining, weeding and Inter cultivation, Supply of inter cultural
Normal onset upland Sorghum (Fodder)/ Pigeonpea gap filling in existing Conservation furrow, implements through RKVY,
followed by crop, Thinning and weeding, Farm ponds through IWSM
15-20 days dry Re sowing, Mulching programme,
spell after Selection/nursery sowing Pulse crop seeds supply
sowing leading of short duration rice through NFSM,
to poor cultivar
germination/cr
op stand etc.
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum
lowland (Fodder)
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Pigeonpea
upland
Un irrigated Toria / Pigeonpea
lowland
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought (long Farming system conservation measures Implementation
dry spell, situation
consecutive 2
weeks rainless
(>2.5 mm)
11
period)
At vegetative Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Thining, weeding and gap Inter cultivation, Supply of inter cultural
stage upland Sorghum (Fodder) filling in existing crop, Conservation furrow, implements through RKVY,
Re sowing, Thinning and weeding, Farm ponds through IWSM
Postponement of top Mulching programme,
dressing of Urea, Pulse crop seeds supply
Life saving irrigation through NFSM,
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum Micro/drip/sprinkler irrigation
lowland (Fodder) under govt. schemes
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/Toria
upland
Un irrigated Toria/ Pigeonpea
lowland
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
drought (long Farming systemb moisture conservation Implementation
dry spell) situationa measures
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Thining, weeding and gap filling in Conservation furrow, Farm ponds through
At flowering/ upland Sorghum (Fodder) existing crop, Thinning and weeding, IWSM programme
fruiting stage Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum Life saving irrigation, Mulching,
lowland (Fodder) Weeding and weed mulching Urea spray
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Toria
upland
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Toria
lowland
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping Crop management Rabi crop planning Remarks on
Farming system Implementation
situation
Terminal Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Life saving irrigation, Toria/mustard Farm ponds through
drought upland Toria/ Pigeonpea Picking/harvesting of pods/ear, Potato IWSM programme,
(Early Harvest at physiological maturity Pea/Chickpea Supply of seed through
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum
withdrawal of stage , Barseem/oat ISOPM,
lowland (Fodder)
monsoon) Harvest for fodder
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/Toria Harvesting and
upland threshing implements
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Bajra/ Maize/ through RKVY,
lowland Sorghum Supply of land lazer
labeler through CLDP
12
or RKVY
1.1.2. Drought Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system Implementation
Delayed Upland sandy Rice (Basmati)-Wheat Replace rice with maize or aerobic Light irrigation with Seed through KSSC and
release of loam soils rice tube well water, NFSM
water in canals Follow alternate wetting Adequate supply of
due to low Use short duration varieties e.g. and drying schedule of electricity/ diesel
rainfall Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, PRH 10 irrigation in rice, should be ensured by
Maize: Kanchan, Sweta, Navin, Alternate Furrow the Govt. agencies.
Surya irrigation, .
Bajra:WCC-75, Raj-171, Pusa-23, Mulching in sugarcane/
Pusa-322 maize
Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- Bajra/Greengram/ Blackgram -
Potato/ Wheat Potato/ Wheat
Sugarcane +cucurbits – No change
Ratoon-Wheat
Lowland clay Rice-wheat Basmati rice –Wheat Light irrigation with tube
loam soils Use short duration varieties e.g. well water,
Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, PRH 10 Follow alternate wetting
and drying schedule of
irrigation in rice,
Alternate Furrow
Sorghum Fodder-Wheat Bajra-Wheat irrigation,
Bajra:WCC-75, Raj-171, Pusa-23, Mulching in
Pusa-322 sugarcane
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
Farming systemg systemh Implementationj
situationf
Limited Upland sandy Rice (Basmati)-Wheat No change Follow alternate wetting and Adequate supply of
release of loam soils Sugarcane +cucurbits – No change drying schedule of irrigation electricity/ diesel
water in canals in rice, should be ensured by
Ratoon-Wheat
due to low Alternate Furrow irrigation, the Govt. agencies.
rainfall Mulchingin sugarcane/
13
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
Farming systemg systemh Implementationj
situationf
maize
Lowland clay Rice-wheat No change Follow alternate wetting and Supply of inter
loam soils Sorghum Fodder-Wheat No change drying schedule of irrigation cultural implements
in rice, through RKV
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change
Alternate Furrow irrigation, Adequate supply of
Mulchingin sugarcane/ electricity/diesel
maize should be ensured by
the Govt. agencies.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping systemh Implementationj
systemg
Non release of Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice Limited irrigation, Seed through KSSC
water in canals irrigated canal sandy Sorghum/Maize Bajra /Pigeonpea/Blackgram Alternate furrow irrigation, and NFSM,
under delayed loam soil Drip irrigation, Supply of inter
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane
onset of Mulching cultural implements
monsoon in Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengram Limited irrigation through RKVY
catchment irrigated canal clay Sorghum Fodder Bajra/Sorghum Fodder Alternate furrow irrigation
loam soil Drip irrigation
Sugarcane + Sugarcane
Mulching
cucurbits
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
Lack of
inflows into Not Applicable
tanks due to
insufficient
/delayed onset
of monsoon
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
Insufficient Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice Limited irrigation, Seed through KSSC and
groundwater irrigated canal sandy /Vegetables (Tomato, Brinjal, Alternate furrow NFSM,
14
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
recharge due loam soil cucrbits etc) irrigation, Harvesting and threshing
to low rainfall Sorghum/Maize Bajra /Pigeonpea/Blackgram Drip irrigation, implements through RKVY
Mulching
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane
Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengram Limited irrigation
irrigated canal clay Sorghum Fodder Bajra/Sorghum Fodder Alternate furrow
loam soil irrigation
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane
Drip irrigation
Mulching
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
in a short span leading to
water logging
Maize + Blackgram / Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose of
Greengram /cucurbits physiological maturity stage produce as early as possible
Sugarcane Provide drainage Supply to sugar mills /crusher
as early as possible or shift to
Drain out excess water and harvest safer place and cover the cane
the lodged crop as early as possible with trash materials
Blackgram or Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Safe storage against storage
Drain out excess water Harvesting at
physiological maturity stage. pest and disease
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
Picking of vegetables at physiological produce as early as possible
maturity stage
Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose of
at physiological maturity stage and produce as early as possible
picking of cucurbits crop.
Brinjal Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
Picking at physiological maturity produce as early as possible
stage
Tomato Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
Picking at physiological maturity produce as early as possible
Provide drainage stage
15
Mango - Spray of 2% urea + Carbendazim -
- 0.02% solution
Guava - Spray of 2% urea + Carbendazim
- 0.02% solution -
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in a short span
Supply to sugar mills /crusher
• Ear thing
Sugarcane as early as possible or shift to
• Tying Drain out excess water and harvest safer place and cover the cane
the lodged crop as early as possible with trash materials
Maize/Sorghum Provide drainage, Drain out excess water & Harvesting
Provide drainage Use Wind breaks at physiological maturity stage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Blackgram/ Greengram Provide drainage, Drain out excess water & Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Provide drainage Use Wind breaks at physiological maturity stage produce as early as possible
Rice basmati Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose of
Provide drainage at physiological maturity stage produce as early as possible
Pigeonpea Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Harvesting Shift to safer place & dispose of
Sowing on raised bed at physiological maturity stage produce as early as possible
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water ,Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose of
Sowing on raised bed physiological maturity stage produce as early as possible
Brinjal Provide drainage Drain out excess water ,Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose of
Provide drainage, physio- produce as early as possible
Sowing on raised bed logical maturity stage
Tomato Provide drainage, Drain out excess water ,Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose of
Provide drainage, Use Wind breaks, physio- produce as early as possible
Sowing on raised bed, Stacking logical maturity stage
Stacking Stacking
Cauliflower Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose of
physio- produce as early as possible
Provide drainage, logical maturity stage
Sowing on raised bed
Cucurbits Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Shift to safer place & dispose of
Provide drainage, physio- produce as early as possible
16
Sowing on raised bed logical maturity stage
Mango Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use Wind breaks -
Guava Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use Wind breaks -
Outbreak of pests and
diseases due to
unseasonal rains
Rice basmati Need based plant Need based plant Shift to safer place & dispose of
Do not use strong pesticide at
protection IPDM for produce as early as possible
Sugarcane protection IPDM for
Rice/pluses Rice/pluses maturity stage
Sorghum fodder
Blackgram/ Greengram
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra Need based plant Need based plant Shift to safer place & dispose of
Do not use strong pesticide at
protection IPDM for protection IPDM for produce as early as possible
Brinjal maturity stage
Rice/pluses Rice/pluses
Tomato
Cucurbits
Cauliflower
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice (basmati) • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Sugarcane • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Sorghum fodder • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Blackgram/ greengram • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
17
produce as early as possible
Pigeonpea • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Continuous submergence Shift to safer place & dispose of
for more than 2 days2 produce as early as possible
Rice • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Mango • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
18
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone/Fog
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measurer
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wavep
Rice basmati • Re sowing of nursery • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent
• Light and frequent irrigation decreased decreased irrigation
during night
Sugarcane • Mulching • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent
decreased decreased irrigation
Sorghum fodder • Re sowing • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Make silage
decreased decreased
Blackgram • Re sowing • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for • Pod picking
/Greengram • Mulching survival
Pigeonpea • Re sowing • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for • Pod picking
• Mulching survival
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching of nursery beds
• Light irrigation during night
Mango • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water • -
Guava • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water • -
Cold waveq
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation
Sugarcane • Light irrigation for survival -- • Harvesting of
cane
19
Horticulture
Tomato • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Harvesting of
fruits
Pea • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Harvesting of
fruits
Potato • Light Sprinkler irrigation -- • Harvesting
Frost
Sugarcane • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Harvesting of
cane
Pigeonpea • Grow as inter crop • Light irrigation • Light irrigation Smoke at night
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Horticulture
Potato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Tomato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • De halming
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Pea • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Mango • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night • Irrigation &Smoking during --
night night
Guava • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night • Irrigation &Smoking during Harvesting
night night
Hailstorm
All the crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Horticulture
All the Vegetable Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
crops
Use anti hail net Use anti hail net Use anti hail net Harvest the damaged
All the Fruit crops Spray of fungicide with 2% urea Spray of fungicide with 2% urea Spray of fungicide with 2% fruits
solution solution urea solution Spray of fungicide with
2% urea solution
Fog
20
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
• Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
• Making of feed blocks trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for small • Cultivation of fast growing
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for ruminant. green fodder crops.
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, • Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, feed • Development of drought
Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland blocks & mixture etc. resistance fodder.
Feed and fodder • Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder • Migration of herd /flock to other places. • Increase the no. of Fodder
availability crops in irrigated area • Establishment of communication and Banks for future use.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder. linkage with other state agencies.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the
concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of drought
resistant crops and their varieties of fodder
crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler irrigation
system.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long term
storage of feed and fodder.
• Preserving water in the pond/tank for drinking • Using preserved water in the tanks for • Recharge of well/ Tanks
purpose. etc.
drinking
• Excavation of bore well/creation of tanks or • Available ground water should be used for
ponds.
drinking on priority basis.
• De-silting of village ponds on regular basis and
Drinking water
adopt water harvesting techniques through
water shed approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube well water
during lean period.
21
• Farmers should be encouraged to avail • Conduction mass animal health camp and • Availing insurance benefits.
Livestock insurance treating the effected animals. • Followed standard Livestock
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Mass campaigning though different media management practices.
management calamities. regarding possible outbreak of diseases and • Proper health care &
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and their management. treatment.
vaccines.
• Vaccination
Floods
• Availing crop insurance
• Utilizing fodder from perennial • Cultivation of fast growing green
• Fodder crop Insurance tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. fodder crops
• Making of feed blocks • Use of feed mixture/block hay etc
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Migration of flock /herds
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, • Establishment of communication and
Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland linkage with other state agencies
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder
crops.
Feed and fodder
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder and that
availability
should be stored on up land.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the
concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of crops and
their varieties of fodder crops for water logged
conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long term
storage of feed and fodder.
• Contaminated flood water should not be
• Open sources of drinking
Drinking water used for drinking.
water (tank/well ) should be
• Making suitable provision for safe drinking
further treated with
surface water including excavation of bore
potassium per magnate.
well/hand pump (India mark—II) at
community level.
• Make farmers aware not to use contaminated/
flood water for drinking purpose.
22
Health and disease • Live stock Insurance • Conduction mass animal health camp and • Culling sick animals
management
• Training to livestock owners regarding natural treating the effected animals. • Availing insurance benefits.
calamities. • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Culling unproductive
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and calamities. livestock
vaccines. • Establishment of Co-ordination with other • Proper disposal of corpse of
• Vaccination Agencies. dead bodies to prevent the
• Use of mass media to spread expat advice spread of contagious
diseases.
Cyclone
Not Applicable
Heat wave and
cold wave
• Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins/ rags in the
animal sheds to protect against direct entry of
• Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in the hot/ cold waves
animal shed • Provide proper bedding to prevent from cold • Repair and maintenance of
additional facilities
• Create adequate sources for additional supply and proper ventilation to prevent from heat.
of water to protect the animals from heat • Provide drinking water to animal frequently
waves. during heat wave
Shelter/environmen
t management • Establishment of modern shelter sheds. • Watch the forecast of weather department.
• As far as possible grow shade trees such as • As for as possible the animal should be
Neem, Pilkhan, Karanj etc near the animal
allowed to wallow in pounds/ canals/ river or
sheds.
give bath once or twice in a day during heat
• Make provision for adequate no. of waves
fans/coolers /heaters according to the
situation, if possible
23
• Organize village level animal health camps
• Insure the animals
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners/ para-vets • Consult veterinary officer immediately if any • Proper after care of animals.
management adverse symptoms are noticed
regarding preventive measure against extreme • Availing insurance benefits.
weather conditions • Use of ITKs for food supplements
• Proper disposal of corpse of
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and dead bodies to prevent the
vaccines etc. spread of contagious diseases.
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold
s based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages with
Suggested contingency measures ongoing programs, if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
• Use of feed concentrates/
• Availing insurance
• Making and storage of feed mixture/blocks etc
Shortage of feed concentrates • Increase the no. of
ingredients • Establishment of
feed banks for future
• Awareness regarding traditional communication with other state
use
feed banks. agencies.
• Feed requirement data should be • Use of locally available
generated feed recourses.
• Prepare the feed requirement data • Import the feed recourse
base of poultry farm. form other states.
• Store the feed ingredients
• Making extra facility for drinking
Drinking water • Frequent supply of drinking water
water.
• Repair & maintenance of water
resources
Health and • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of affected poultry • Culling of flock
disease medicines and vaccines. birds • Availing insurance
benefits
management • Vaccination
• Proper disposal of
• Training to poultry
corpse of dead bodies
Growers regarding natural to prevent the pared of
24
calamities. contagious diseases
Floods
• Cleaning of feed
Shortage of feed
store & repair if any.
ingredients
• Use of stored feed in • Moist feed should be
• Sufficient quantity balanced form dried &treated as per
of feed ingredients should be • Prevent the feed from requirement
stored moisture.
• Repair,
maintenance and
cleaning of water
recourse
• Make provision of ground water • Use only Ground water obtained • Sanitation of
Drinking water for drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell open Wells
Health and • Availing insurance
disease • Veterinary preparedness with benefits.
management medicines and vaccines • Migration of flock if required • Culling of
• Vaccination unproductive flock
Not Applicable
Cyclone
• Establishment of • Repair and
Shortage of feed • Storage and making of feed communication with other state maintenance of feed
ingredients concentrates agencies store
• Proper feed requirement data base • Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other areas
• Repair and
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water • Use only Ground water obtained maintenance of water
for drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell recourse
Health and • Training to poultry growers • Treatment of injured poultry • Culling of flock
birds.
disease regarding natural calamities. • Availing insurance
management • Veterinary preparedness with benefits.
medicines and vaccines. • Proper disposal of
25
corpse of dead bodies to
prevent the pared of
contagious diseases.
Heat wave and cold wave
• Keep the birds in appropriate
shelter
• Making sufficient provision of • Making of modern
Shelter/environm shelter to protect live stock from • Provide proper bedding to shelter sheds
ent management heat and cold waves prevent from cold and proper • Increase the plantation
ventilated to prevent from heat
• Establishment of alternate resource of trees
• Provide drinking water to birds
for water supply.
frequently.
• Modern shelter sheds.
• Adopted proper management
practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
• Availing insurance
benefits
Health and • Insurance • Provide proper treatment as per • Culling of unproductive
flock
requirement
d m i a se n a a s g e e ment • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of injured poultry • Proper disposal of
medicines and vaccines
corpse of dead bodies to
• Training to poultry growers prevent the pared of
regarding natural calamities contagious diseases
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine _ _ _
Inland
(i) Shallow water depth due to • Adopt appropriate measures to • Harvest the crop partially • Re stock
insufficient rains/inflow
reduce water seepage or infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Regular observation to check the • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen • Maintain appropriate level of water
26
water quality and remove the • Churning of pond water if possible
pollutants if any. • Check the water quality and remove
the pollutants if any.
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Ensure the Oxygen availability
insufficient rains/inflow into ponds for the survival of
• Adopt appropriate measures to fish
reduce water seepage or infiltration • Avoid any kind of water • Maintain appropriate level of water
from ponds pollution in ponds
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution • Add oxy-flow to improve • Check the water quality and remove
and maintain water pH oxygen into ponds. the pollutants if any.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in • Add some fresh water from other • Add oxy-flow to improve • Add fresh water into pond for life
ponds / change in water quality source like cannel etc oxygen into ponds. saving and to reduce salt load
• Churning of pond water • Maintain appropriate level of
• Add fresh water into pond for water in ponds
life saving and to reduce salt • Check the water quality and
load remove the pollutants if any.
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
• Close supervision of flood
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged • Boats, nets etc should be taken out condition • Damaged boat or nets should be
from water bodies repaired
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _ • Repair the damaged house.
• Sanitation and proper disposal of
(iii) Loss of stock _ _
corpse
(iv) Changes in water quality • Increase the height of bunds. -- --
(v) Health and diseases -- • Treatment if possible --
B. Aquaculture
(i) Inundation with flood water • Repair the bunds to prevent the • Avoid inflow of flood water • Repair the damaged bunds
inflow of water
from outside. • Check water quality
• If inflow water is not polluted • If inflow water is not polluted • Change the water if it is polluted
then place the net at inlet and
that can be permitted to flow
outlet
through net placed at inlet and
27
• Raise the height of bunds outlet of pond.
• Plan a proper drainage system at • Fencing of net required in case
farm of overflow to avoid the
migration of fish
• Plantation of soil binding plants
at bund
• Maintain appropriate level of
(ii) Water contamination and • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Stop inflow of contaminated water in ponds
changes in water quality water • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any.
(iii) Health and diseases • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Diagnostic measures and provide • Limeing and medication as per
• Vaccination appropriate medicines
requirement
• Use Cifex to control ulcerative
syndromes
• Immediately remove the dead
• Marketable stock should be sold
fishes from ponds and do
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
sanitation • After sanitation add new stock
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Dommageable infrastructures • Do not supplié Electric in flood • Repaire and service the damage
aerators, huts etc) should be secured éd area infrastructure
3. Cyclone / Tsunami Not Applicable
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
B. Aquaculture
• Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of
water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m
(i) Changes in pond deep ponds deep ponds deep ponds
environment (water quality) • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any
• Remove the dead fishes from
i) Health and Disease management • Limeing@300kg/ha • Medication as per requirement
ponds and add new stocks to
compensate
• the production
28
29