State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Mau
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Eastern Plain, Hot Subhumid (moist) Eco-Region (13.1) & Northern Plain, Hot Subhumib (Dry) Eco-
Region (9.2)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) Middle Gangetic Plain Region (IV)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Eastern Plain Zone (UP-9)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Barabanki,Ambedkarnagar,Faizabad,Sultanpur,Azamgarh,Mau,Jaunpur,Varanasi, Gazipur, Ballia,
Zone* (*>50% area falling in the zone) Bhadohi
Geographic coordinates of district Latitude Longitude Altitude
headquarters
25’o57’ N 83’o36’ E 77.1 m
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ Directorate of Research, SAU, Kumarganj
ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with KVK, Mau
address
Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm)
(number)
SW monsoon (June-Sep): 992.8 40 3rd week of June 1st week of October
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec): 61.2 2 - -
Winter (Jan- Feb) 33.6 5 - -
Summer (March-May) 29.7 3 - -
Annual 1117.3 50 - -
1
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural Misc. land
statistics) use tree
crops
and
groves
Area (‘000 ha) 171.62 125.29 0.56 22.81 0.204 2.2 3.5 1.74 12.77 2.4
1. 4 Major Soils (common names like red Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total Geographical area
sandy loam deep soils (etc.,)*
Loam/Clay Loam, Irrigated soils 70.13 62.62
Rain fed Loam/clay loam soils 24.38 21.77
Diara and river bed, Tauns & Ghaghra clay 3.67 3.28
loam soils
Deep ( pond, reservoir and lake) clay soils 3.96 3.54
Low land 30-45 cm depth 5.28 4.71
Rain fed Sodic soils 1.28 1.14
Irrigated Sodic soils 4.27 3.81
Source: districtprofile Uttar pradesh
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity(% )
Net sown area 125.29
Area sown more than once 39.61 172.4
Gross cropped area 164.9
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 115
Gross irrigated area -
2
Rainfed area -
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals - 71.01 19.2
Tanks - 0.004 -
Open wells - 0.1 -
Bore wells 17.5 174.05 47.25
Lift irrigation schemes - - -
Micro-irrigation - - -
Other sources (please specify) - - -
Total Irrigated Area - 368.3 -
Pump sets - 135 36.6
No. of Tractors - - -
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils such as high levels of arsenic, fluoride,
Department /Board) saline etc)
Over exploited - - -
Critical - - -
Semi- critical - - -
Safe - - -
Wastewater availability and use - - -
Ground water quality
*Over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
3
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture
Area (‘000 ha)
Major field crops Kharif Rabi
1.7
cultivated Grand
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer
total
Rice 114.5 0.3 114.9 - - - - -
Sorghum - 0.9 0.9 - - - - -
Maize 0.3 0.3 0.6 - - - - -
Pigeon pea - 3.3 3.3 - - - - -
Wheat - - - 118.061 0.066 118.127 - -
Chickpea - - - 0.186 0.968 1.154 - -
Pea - - - 4325 0.003 4.328 - -
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits Total Irrigated Rainfed
- - - -
Horticulture crops -
Total Irrigated Rainfed
Vegetables
Potato 3998 3998 0
Onion 0.1 0.15 0
Others 6.9 6.6 0.2
Medicinal and - - -
Aromatic crops
Plantation crops - - -
- - - -
Eg., industrial - - -
pulpwood crops etc.
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Jowar 0.94 0 0.9
Bajra 0.03 0 0.03
Maize 0.42 0.05 0.3
Total fodder crop
3.65 1.245 2.4
area
4
Grazing land - - -
Sericulture etc - - -
Others (specify) - - -
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Indigenous - - 308.02
Non descriptive Cattle -
- -
(local low yielding)
Improved crossbred cattle (Cow & Buffalo only) - - 214.08
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) - - -
Buffaloes - - 154.6
Goat - - 165.3
Sheep - - 598.2
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak, Horse, Monkey etc.) - - 10.2
Commercial dairy farms (Number) - - -
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial - -
Backyard - -
Total 141.295
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
Boats Nets
Storage
No. of fishermen Mechanized Non-mechanized facilities (Ice
i) Marine (Data Source: Non-
Mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake plants etc.)
Fisheries Department) mechanized
Gill nets) & trap nets)
- - - - - -
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
- - -
B. Culture
5
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000 tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - -
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department) - - -
Others - - -
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops
Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
residue
Name of
1.11 as fodder
crop Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
(‘000
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Rice 292.8 2549 - - - - 292.8 2549 -
Sorghum 0.84 897 - - - - 0.84 897 -
Maize 0.8 1202 - - - - 0.8 1202 -
Pigeon pea 3.8 1132 - - - - 3.8 1132 -
Wheat - - 383.4 3246 - - 383.4 3246 -
Chick pea - - 1.19 1034 - - 1.19 1034 -
Pea - - 4.62 1068 - - 4.62 1068 -
- - - - - - - - - -
Major Horticultural crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Crop 1 - - - - - - - - - -
Sowing window for 5 major
1.12 field crops (start and end of Paddy Maize Pigeonpea Wheat Lentil
normal sowing period)
Kharif- Rainfed 2nd week of June- 1st week of June- 1st week of July - - -
3rd week of July 4th week of June 4th week of July
Kharif-Irrigated 4th week of June- 3rd week of June- - - -
2nd week of August 2nd week of July
Rabi- Rainfed - - Early rabi- September 2nd week of October - 1st week of October –
-October 2nd week of November 3rd week of October
6
Rabi-Irrigated - - - 2nd week of November- -
4th week of December
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought - √ -
Flood - √ -
Cyclone - - √
Hail storm - √
Heat wave - √
Cold wave - √ -
Frost - - √
Sea water intrusion - √
Pests and disease outbreak (specify) - √ -
Others (specify) - - -
1.14 Include Digital maps of Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
9
10
Annexure II
11
Annexure III
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded .
2. Deep, slightly eroded silty loam soils.
3. Deep, fine soils moderately saline and sodic associated with loamy soils.
4. Deep, silty soils with moderately salinity and sodicity associated with loamy
soils with water logging .
5. Deep, silty soils and slightly saline and slightly eroded associated with
loamy soils
6. Deep, silty soils associated slightly eroded with loamy soils.
7. Deep, silty soils with moderate salinity/sodicity associated with loamy soils
slightly eroded .
12
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system cropping system Implementation
onset) including variety
Delay by 2 weeks Deep loamy soils Rice Rice Raise Staggered rice nursery should be
(tarai soils) Transplanting/Direct grown at 15 days interval in small areas at
1st week of July seeding of Medium and least two times
Short duration varieties
of Rice Such as NDR-
97, NDR-359,NDR-
80,NDR-118,
Baranideep etc.
Sandy loam soils Maize Maize Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
duration varieties of Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea Pigeonpea Sowing on raised beds,
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
13
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system including variety Implementation
onset) system
Delay by 4 weeks Deep loamy soils Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat • Direct seedling of short duration • Seed-drill under
(tarai soils) varieties of Rice such as NDR-97, NDR- RKVY
3rd week of July Transplanting/Direct seeding of 80, NDR-118, Saket-4 • Supply of seed
Medium and Short duration through govt.
varieties of Rice Such as NDR- • Raise Staggered rice nursery should be agencies ie.
97, NDR-359,NDR-80,NDR- grown at 15 days interval in small areas NFSM,RKVY
118, Baranideep, Govind,Saket- at least two times
4, Ratna,IR-36 and Pant-12 etc.
• Adopt SRI system of nursery raising
• Transplanting of Rice (beyond 20th July)
with 3-4 seedlings/hill to increasing the
plant population of 60 hills/m2, instead
of 50 hills/m2.
• Pruning of over aged Rice seedlings for
better establishment and optimum plant
stand
• Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5 kg
Potash as to increase the drought
tolerance in nursery / standing crops
Sandy loam soils Maize Maize Maintain weed free condition for soil
Maize-Prakash, Sartaj, Naveen, moisture conservation
Tarun.
Intercropping/ mixed cropping of maize
with long duration varieties of
Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea No change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
14
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system including variety Implementation
onset) system
Delay by 6 weeks Deep loamy soils Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat Direct seeding of rice • Seed-drill under
1st week of (tarai soils) RKVY
August Paddy: Short duration varieties In case of late transplanting of • Supply of seed
of paddy such as NDR-97, rice(beyond 20th July) planting should through govt.
NDR-80,NDR-118, Pant Dhan- be dense by increasing the number of agencies ie.
NFSM,RKVY
12 should be transplanted/direct seedlings/hill from 2 to 3 to 3 to 4.
seeding.
Adopt SRI system of nursery raising
Weeding and interculture
Foliar spraying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5 kg
Potash as to increase the drought
tolerance in nursery / standing crops
Life saving irrigation in transplanted
rice
Sandy loam soils Maize Greengram/ Blackgram Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Greengram/ Blackgram/
Greengram: T-44, Pant mung-1, maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
Narendra mung-1 duration varieties of pigeonpea
Blackgram : Narendra urd- Sorghum+green gram(2:2)
1,Pant urd-25
Pigeonpea Pigeonpea: Bahar Maize (Tipekhiya) in
Pigeonpea(Narendra Arhar-1) crop in
1:1 row ratio
Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Pigeonpea+ Blackgram/Greengram
(1:3)
15
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system including variety Implementation
onset) system
Delay by 8 weeks Deep loamy soils Rice-Wheat Preference should be given Direct sowing • Seed-drill under
3rd week of August (tarai soils) for sowing of Pearlmillet and RKVY
Sesame In case of late transplanting of • Supply of seed
rice(beyond 20th July) planting should through govt.
Pearlmillet: Pusa 322, be dense by increasing the number of agencies ie.
seedlings/hill from 2 to 3 to 3 to 4. NFSM,RKVY
323(Hybrid) and WCC-75,
Raj-171(Composite)
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5 kg
Potash as to increase the drought
Sesame: - Type-4, Type-78,
tolerance in nursery / standing crops
Type-12
Life saving irrigation in transplanted
Greengram : T-44, Pant
rice
mung-1, Pant mung-2,
Sandy loam soils Maize Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Samrat, Malviya, Janpriya,
Greengram/ Blackgram/maize/sorghum/
Malviya jyoti, Narendra
Pearlmillet with long duration varieties
mung-1
of pigeonpea
Blackgram : Narendra urd-
Land preparation for sowing of early
1,Pant urd-25, Pant urd-19,
rabi crops like potato,toria,lahi and
Uttara, Type-9
mustard
Pigeonpea September Pigeonpea -
Varieties Bahar, PDA-11,
Pusa-9 should be done till Ist
week of September.
16
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Soil nutrient &
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
drought (Normal Crop management moisture conservation
situation system Implementation
onset) measures
Normal onset Deep loamy soils Rice After seeding of rice if there is Weeding at critical • Supply of inter
followed by 15-20 (tarai soils) break of monsoon by 7 to 10 stages cultural
days dry spell after days and if seedling mortality is implements
sowing leading to Foliar praying of 2.5 kg through RKVY
observed then re-sowing with the
poor germination/ Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as • Farm ponds
same variety
crop stand etc. to increase the drought through IWSM
tolerance in nursery / programme
Gap filling/transplanting in rice
standing crops • Pulse crop seeds
supply through
Using “Sanda” method, plant
Life saving irrigation NFSM
polulation can be maintainted
with sufficient number of tillers Proper electricity
in late drought condition as to monitoring/rostering
minimize the production losses system should be
ensured in area for
regular supply of
electricity for pumping
of water for life saving
irrigation
Sandy loam soils Maize Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain moisture
optimum plant population
Pigeonpea Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain moisture
optimum plant population
17
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season
drought (long dry Normal
Major Farming Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
spell, consecutive 2 Crop/cropping Crop management
situation conservation measures Implementation
weeks rainless system
(>2.5 mm) period)
At vegetative stage Deep loamy soils Rice Gap filling/transplanting in rice Weeding as to conserve the
(tarai soils) residual soil moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to boost
up the growth Leaf mulching to conserve the
soil moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea +
2.5 kg Potash as to increase the
drought tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation from the
stored water during the rainy
season.
Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering system
should be ensured in area for
regular supply of electricity for
pumping of water for life saving
irrigation
Sandy loam soils Maize Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2% MOP to
distance between the plants. increase the resistance to drought
Frequent interculture Leaf mulching to conserve the
soil moisture
Earthing up in Pigeonpea
Conservation furrow
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to boost
up the growth
Life saving irrigation
Pigeonpea -
18
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Normal
Major Farming Soil nutrient & moisture conservation Remarks on
drought (long dry Crop/cropping Crop management
situation measures Implementation
spell) system
At flowering/ Deep clay loam Rice Foliar spraying of 2% Weeding as to conserve the residual soil
fruiting stage soils urea to boost up the moisture
growth
Leaf mulching to conserve the soil
moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5 kg
Potash as to increase the drought tolerance
in nursery / standing crops
Life saving irrigation from the stored
water during the rainy season.
Proper electricity monitoring/rostering
system should be ensured in area for
regular supply of electricity for pumping
of water for life saving irrigation
Maize Thinning to maintain Foliar spraying of 2% MOP to increase
proper distance between the resistance to drought
the plants.
Pigeonpea Leaf mulching to conserve the soil
Frequent interculture moisture
Earthing up in Pigeonpea Conservation furrow
Life saving irrigation
Foliar spraying of 2%
urea to boost up the
growth
19
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Terminal drought Normal
Major Farming Remarks on
(Early withdrawal Crop/cropping Crop management Rabi Crop planning
situation Implementation
of monsoon) system
Deep clay loam Rice Alternate management of Better pulverization should be made
soils irrigation should be ensured for conservation of soil moisture
for provide life saving
following by planking for sowing of
irrigation
early rabi crops like toria and potato
etc..
Proper electricity monitoring/
rostering system should be
Toria variety- type-9, type-36, PT-
ensured in area for regular
303, PT-30 and ageti Rai should be
supply of electricity for sown in 1st week of September
pumping of water for life while Bhawani variety can be sown
saving irrigation in 2nd week of September.
In fallow fields to sow Ageti rai,
potato varieties like Kufri Ashoka,
Kufri Chandra mukhi and other
vegetable crops like spinach,reddish
coriander etc.
Maize Harvesting of intercrop at Better pulverization should be made
physiological maturity (Maize, for conservation of soil moisture
Blackgram and Greengram)
following by planking for sowing of
early rabi crops like toria and potato
Earthing up of Pigeonpea
etc..
Harvesting of green cobs
(maize) and sell in market and
Toria variety- type-9, type-36, PT-
remaining portion will be used
303, PT-30 and ageti Rai should be
for fodder.
sown in 1st week of September
while Bhawani variety can be sown
Life saving irrigation to
in 2nd week of September.
pigeonpea if possible.
Pigeonpea -
20
2.1.2 Drought - Irrigated situation
Suggested Contingency measures
Normal
Condition Major Farming Remarks on
Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures
situation Implementation
system
Delayed Deep clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Short duration rice varieties- NDR Community nursery Breeder’s seed will
release of Lentil 97, Ratna, Narendra 118, Narendra be supplied by
water in canals 97, Pant Dhan 12, HUR 105, Induri Direct seeding in small beds. BHU and NDUAT,
due to low Sambha, HUR 2-1, HUR-3022 to be Faizabad.
rainfall grown under aerobic condition. Use of micro-irrigation
systems viz. sprinkler & sub- Seed drills RKVY
surface irrigation. and supply of seeds
NFSM
Limited release Sandy clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Rice\ Maize \ Sorghum Community nursery,
of water in Lentil
canals due to Grow short duration aerobic rice Direct seeding in small beds.
low rainfall such as NDR 97, NDR 118, Govind,
Vandana, Varanideep, Susk Samrat Use of micro-irrigation
, HUR 105 systems viz. sprinkler & sub-
surface irrigation.
Maize: Malviya hybrid Makka-2,
Naveen & Jaunpuri
Pearl millet : WCC 75, Raj 171,
Pusa 23
Sorghum: CSH-16, CHS-9, CHS-
14, CSV-13 &CSV-15 should be
grown on ridges for fodder/grain
purposes.
Non release of Sandy clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Shift to only aerobic rice Direct seeding in small beds.
water in canals Lentil Or Rice may be replaced by pulses
under delayed Greengram: Pant Mung -8, PDM- Use of micro-irrigation
onset of 11, Samrat, Jyoti, Jagriti, Janpriya, systems viz. sprinkler & sub-
monsoon in surface irrigation.
Jan Chetana & Jan Kalyani
catchment
Blackgram: Type 9, Pant U 19, Pant
U 35, Narendra Urd 1 & Azad Urd-
3
Sesame :Type 4, T-12, T-13,
Shekhar, GT1, TC 25 &TC 289
21
Lack of Sandy clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Sorghum\ Pearl millet Conservation tillage,
inflows into Lentil
tanks due to Sowing of Pearl millet &
insufficient Sorghum for grain purposes at
/delayed onset 45 cm on ridges.
of monsoon
Foliar application of 2% MOP
Use of mulches (straw/dust).
Insufficient Sandy clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Rice should be replaced with pulses Direct seeding in small beds.
groundwater Lentil (green gram & black gram), oilseeds
recharge due to (Sesame) in Kharif and wheat by .
low rainfall Chickpea & lentil in Rabi season.
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
Continuous high rainfall in a short span leading to - - - -
water logging
Rice Provide drainage Proper bunding, drain out Harvesting at Shift to safer
excess water physiological maturity place
Wheat Provide drainage Drain out excess water Harvesting at Shift to safer
physiological maturity place
Pigeonpea Provide drainage and Make inter-row furrow to Harvesting at Shift to safer
Practice of sowing on Drain out excess water physiological maturity place
ridges
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in a short span2 - - - -
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to unseasonal rains
Rice, Wheat, Chickpea, Pigeonpea, Pearl millet Need based plant Need based plant protection Need based plant Safe storage
protection (integrated (integrated pest and disease protection (integrated against stored
pest and disease management pest and disease grain pest and
management) management diseases
22
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Transient water logging/ partial
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
inundation1
• Arrangement of Drainage
channel • Removal of excess water • Foliar spray of 5% urea
Rice -
• Drainage of water from the
rice fields
• Drainage of water
• Creation of surface drains at
Maize - - -
appropriate places to avoid
water logging
Horticulture
Continuous submergence
- - - -
for more than 2 days2
Rice • Drainage of excess water • Just after finishing of floods, • Foliar spray of 5% urea • Preference should be given
through drainage channel topdressing of urea could be for planting of Autumn
• Transplanting of deep water ensured in the field Sugarcane in the month of
rice –Madhupur, Jalmagn, Oct so that their grand
Jalpriya, Jalnidhi, Awarodhi growth completed to the
maxi. Extent prior to
floods.
• Planting of Sugarcane on
raised beds instead of flat
bed.
• Emphasis could be given
for cultivation of Toria,
Urd, Mung/Sunflower
Horticulture
Sea water intrusion Not applicable
23
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measurer
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice • Frequently supply of fresh water - - -
• Avoid irrigation during hot period • Micro-irrigation - -
Cold wave • •
Wheat Provide light irrigation Provide light irrigation Provide light irrigation -
Pigeonpea Mulching Light irrigation for survival Light irrigation for survival Harvesting at
physiological maturity
Frost Not applicable
Hailstorm Not applicable
All the crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Cyclone Not applicable
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
• Storage of straw and silage in Silo pit - -
Feed and fodder availability
according to population of animal
• Maintenance and inspection of Tubewells,
- -
Drinking water Hand pumps, Ponds,
Tanks etc.
• Vaccination of animals against FMD, HS, - -
Health and disease management
B.Q. and Dewarming
Floods
Feed and fodder availability • Increase the area of fodder • Availability of safe place • Sowing of rabi fodder crops
24
for the animals - Berseems, Lucerne, Oat and other rabi
crops
• Distribution of stored feed • Drain of infected stored water and
• Crops according to population and their
Drinking water and fodders according to the supply of fresh water for drinking.
storage
population of affected
• Arrangement of clean drinking water in • Provide neat & clean • Proper treatment of affected (animals
Health and disease management
sufficient water in growth drinking water vaccination & Dewarming)
Cyclone Not applicable
• Arrangement of clean drinking water in • Organize health camp -
Feed and fodder availability
sufficient water in growth regularly
Drinking water - - -
Health and disease management - - -
Heat wave and cold wave
• Proper availability of shelter,
• Shelter house/Farm house should not face drinking water and feeds & • Provide shelterbelts of good quality
Shelter/environment management
directly fodder as per need of the materials
animals
• Ensure the availability of drinking water and • Routine health check up by veterinary
Health and disease management -
as well as electrolytes doctors
s based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.2 Poultry
Suggested contingency measures Convergence/linkages
with ongoing programs, if
Before the event During the event After the event
any
Drought
Shortage of feed ingredients - - - -
• Deep tubewell provide • Provide the drinking • Provide the drinking -
Drinking water
clean drinking water water
• Vaccination against • Vaccination for infectious -
Health and disease management • Vaccination diseases such as-
infectious diseases
Ranikhet, infectious
25
Coryza, IBD, ILT
Floods
• Inspection of established -
• Provide the drinking • Provide the drinking
Shortage of feed ingredients Tubewell & other water
water water
sources
• Vaccination for infectious -
• Vaccination against diseases such as-
Drinking water • Vaccination
infectious diseases Ranikhet, infectious
Coryza, IBD, ILT
Health and disease management - - - -
Cyclone Not applicable
Shortage of feed ingredients - - - -
Drinking water - - - -
Health and disease management - - - -
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environment management • Arrangement of proper • Maintenance of • Heat check up -
shelter and cooler/heater surrounds temp.
to maintain the proper and prevent the
temp. of the shelter birds from direct
house exposure of heat/
cold waves
Health and disease management • Vaccination • Vaccination • Vaccination -
• Availability of neat &
clean water
a based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
- - -
1) Drought
- - -
A. Capture
26
- - -
Marine
Arrange for alternative water Sell the produce at minimum
Inland Lime Application
resources acceptable size to the consumer
(i) Shallow water depth due to Stocking of Air breathing - -
insufficient rains/inflow
(ii) Changes in water quality - -
Increased water temperature
- -
(iii) Any other Decrease dissolve oxygen
- - - -
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to
Arrange for alternative water Minimum disturbance to the fish Maintain the pond properly by liming,
insufficient rains/inflow
resources i.e. minimum fishing activities manuring and fertlization
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in - - -
ponds / change in water quality
- - -
(iii) Any other
- - -
2) Floods
- - -
A. Capture
- - -
Marine
Inland
Harvest the large size fish Protect the escape of fish Manage the inlet, outlet structures
along with pond land
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged - - -
- - -
(ii) No.of houses damaged
- - -
(iii) Loss of stock
- - -
(iv) Changes in water quality
- - -
(v) Health and diseases
- - -
B. Aquaculture
(i) Inundation with flood water Make 2.5 m high bylonnet bundry on Check for outlet to remain open Close outlet and open inlet
the band of pond
-
(ii) Water contamination and changes Close inlet and divert water Treatment of water with Alum and
in water quality receiving channel KmnO
4
- -
(iii) Health and diseases Feeding, liming, manuring and
27
fertilization of ponds
- - -
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
chemicals etc)
- - -
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, huts etc)
- - -
(vi) Any other
Not applicable
3. Cyclone / Tsunami
4. Heat wave and cold wave
- - -
A. Capture
- - -
Marine
- - -
Inland
- - -
B. Aquaculture
- - -
(i) Changes in pond environment
(water quality)
- - -
(ii) Health and Disease management
- - -
(iii) Any other
a based on forewarning wherever available
28