State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Meerut
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Northern Plain (And Central Highlands) Including Aravallis, Hot Semi-Arid Eco-Region (4.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) Upper Gangetic Plain Region (V)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Western Plain Zone (UP-3)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Zone* Muzaffarnagar, Meerut, Baghpat, Ghaziabad, G.B. Nagar and Bulandshahar.
(*>50% area falling in the zone)
Geographic coordinates of district headquarters Latitude Longitude Altitude
280 98’ 770 07’ 218 Mt
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ ZARS/ ZRS, Modipuram, Meerut, S.V.Patel University of Agriculture & Technology, Meerut - 250110
RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with Swami Kalyan Dev Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Hastinapur of S.V.P.U.A. & T, Meerut.
address
Name and address of the nearest Agro met Field College of Agricultural sciences, S.V.Patel University of Agriculture & Technology, Meerut -
Unit (AMFU, IMD) for agro-advisories in the Zone 250110
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy Normal Onset Normal Cessation
days (number) ( specify week and month) (specify week and month)
SW monsoon (June-Sep) 598 46 3rd week of July 2nd week of September
NE / Post Monsoon (Oct-Dec) 31 12 3rd week of December -
Winter (Jan- March) 66 14 - -
Summer (Apr-May) 24 07 - -
1
Annual 719 79 - -
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land under Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland Misc. tree uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural crops and land
statistics) use groves
Area (‘000 ha) 273.005 198.941 21.314 39.336 0.376 2.596 2.012 2.859 2.997 2.574
1. 4 Major Soils Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total
Very deep Loam soils 69.6 35%
Very deep Sandy Loam soils 55.7 28%
Very deep Sandy soils 67.6 34%
Very deep Silty Loam soils 5.9 3%
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity %
Net sown area 198.941 152.67%
Area sown more than once 104.783
Gross cropped area 303.724
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 191.827
Gross irrigated area 303.706
Rainfed area 7.114
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals - 35.608 18.56%
Tanks 0.141 0.073%
2
Open wells 0 -
Bore wells 155.949 81.3%
Lift irrigation schemes -
Micro-irrigation -
Other sources (Sewage water/ drains) 0.129 0.067%
Total Irrigated Area 191.827
Pump sets
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils such as high levels of arsenic, fluoride,
Department /Board) Block-12 saline etc)
Over exploited 0 - Not reported
Critical 1 (Kharkhauda) 8.357 do
Semi- critical 3 - do
Safe 8 - do
Wastewater availability and use Daurala, Meerut - do
Ground water quality Good
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures of 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated
Kharif Rabi Summer
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Grand total
Rice 17.629 - 17.629 - - - - 17.629
Maize 0.329 - 0.329 - - - - 0.339
Sugarcane - - - 8.365 - 8.365 121.258 129.623
Wheat - - - 87.795 - 87.795 - 87.795
3
Pulses - 0.253 0.253 0.30 0.446 0.746 0.245 1.244
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits
Total Irrigated Rainfed
Mango 18 12 6
Guava 3.5 3.050 0.450
Other Fruits Crops 3.232 2.262 0.969
Horticulture crops - Total Irrigated Rainfed
Vegetables
Potato 8.768 8.768 -
Other Vegetable Crops 32.815 32.815 -
Medicinal and Aromatic Total Irrigated Rainfed
crops
Flowers 0.850 0.850 -
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Popular 0.456 0.456 -
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 16.538 11.325 5.213
Berseem /oat 1.321 1.321 -
4
Total fodder crop area 17.859 12.646 5.213
Grazing land 0.123 - 0.123
Sericulture etc Nil - -
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding) 15.126 65.0796 80.205
Improved cattle 10.084 43.386 53.470
Crossbred cattle 25.210 108.466 133.676
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) 146.560 610.177 756.737
Descript Buffaloes 62.811 261.504 324.316
Goat 16.801 32.243 49.044
Sheep Indio + Exotic 3.067+.098 3.643+0.173 6.981
Camel, Pig, Yak etc. -- -- 1115.090
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial 14.806
Backyard 16.300
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: Fisheries No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Department) facilities
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized (Ice plants
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake & etc.)
Gill nets) trap nets)
Nil - - - - -
ii) Inland (Data Source: Fisheries No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
5
Department) 06 - 818
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000
tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - 215
ii) Fresh water (Village tanks)(Data Source: Fisheries department) 797.60 - -
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years: 2008-09 )
1.11 Name of crop Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
residue as
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
fodder
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
Rice 45.113 2559 - - - - 45.113 2559 54.14
Maize 0.645 1903 - - - - 0.645 1903 0.015
Pulses 0.120 442 0.234 872 0.118 6.28 0.472 679 0.216
Wheat - - 314.833 3586 - - 3870
Sugarcane - - 533.69 63800 - - 533.69 63800 122.7
Mustard - - 4.105 1105 - - 4.105 1105 -
Major Horticultural crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
All Fruits - - - - - - 220.150 106.19
All Vegetables - - - - - - 613.449 186.94
Potato - - - - - - 206.311 235.3
Flowers - - - - - - 0.900 105.88
6
1.12 Sowing window for 5
Rice Wheat Sugarcane Pulses Potato
major field crops
Kharif- Rainfed - - - July – August -
Kharif-Irrigated June – July - March – May May – June -
Rabi- Rainfed - - - October – November -
Rabi-Irrigated - November – October – November November – December October – November
December
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √
Cold wave √
Frost √
Sea water intrusion √
Sheath blight & Hopper in rice √
Fog √
1.14 Include Digital maps of Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure II Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure III Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
Annexure II
9
Annexure III
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded .
2. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty soils .
3. Deep, fine soils moderately saline and sodic associated with loamy
soils, slightly eroded .
4. Deep, loamy soils, moderate salinity and sodicity associated with
loamy soils with moderate salinity and strong sodicity
5. Deep, silty soils associated with loamy soils slightly eroded .
Old Alluvial plain with river left out channels/Oxbows/point bars (1-
3%slope)
6. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with stratified
loamy soils slightly eroded
Active Flood Plain (1-3% slope)
7. Deep, sandy soils with moderate flooding associated with stratified
loamy soils and slight flooding .
10
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation (Rainfed area is negligible, so there is no need of contingencies)
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping systemb Change in crop / cropping Agronomic Remarks on
drought (delayed situationa systemc including variety measuresd Implementatio
onset) ne
Delay by 2 weeks
Not applicable
Delay by 4 weeks Not applicable
Delay by 6 weeks Not applicable
Delay by 8 weeks Not applicable
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season drought (Normal Major Farming Normal Crop / Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
onset) situationa Cropping system moisture Implementatio
conservation n
measures
Normal onset followed by 15-20 days Not applicable
dry spell after sowing leading to poor
germination/crop stand etc.
At vegetative stage Not applicable
At flowering/ fruiting stage Not applicable
Terminal drought Not applicable
11
2.1.2 Drought- Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/ Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation cropping system system Implementation
Delayed Upland sandy loam Rice (Basmati)-Wheat Replace rice with maize or Light irrigation with tube Seed through KSSC and
release of soils aerobic rice well water, NFSM,
water in canals Follow alternate wetting and Adequate supply of
due to low Use short duration varieties drying schedule of irrigation electricity/diesel should be
rainfall of Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, PRH in rice, ensured by the Govt.
10 Alternate Furrow irrigation, agencies.
Maize: Kanchan, Sweta, Mulching in sugarcane /
Navin, Surya maize
Sorghum Bajra/Greengram/ Blackgram
(Fodder)/Maize- - Potato/ Wheat
Potato/ Wheat
Bajra:Wcc-75,Raj-171,Pusa-
23,Pusa-322
Sugarcane +cucurbits No change
–Ratoon-Wheat
Lowland clay loam Rice-wheat Basmati rice –Wheat Light irrigation with tube Seed through KSSC and
soils well water, NFSM,
Use short duration varieties Follow alternate wetting and Adequate supply of
of Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, PRH drying schedule of irrigation electricity/diesel should be
10 in rice, ensured by the Govt.
Sorghum Fodder- Bajra-Wheat Alternate Furrow irrigation, agencies.
Wheat Bajra:Wcc-75,Raj-171,Pusa- Mulching in sugarcane
23,Pusa-322
Sugarcane-Ratoon- No change
Wheat
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg crop/cropping Implementationj
systemh
Limited release Upland sandy loam soils Rice (Basmati)-Wheat No change Follow alternate wetting and Adequate supply of
12
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg crop/cropping Implementationj
systemh
of water in Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- No change drying schedule of irrigation in electricity/diesel
canals due to Potato/ Wheat rice, should be ensured by
low rainfall Alternate Furrow irrigation, the Govt. agencies.
Sugarcane +cucurbits – No change
Mulching in sugarcane/ maize
Ratoon-Wheat
Lowland clay loam soils Rice-wheat No change Follow alternate wetting and Supply of inter cultural
Sorghum Fodder-Wheat No change drying schedule of irrigation in implements through
rice, RKV,
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change required
Alternate Furrow irrigation, Adequate supply of
Mulching in sugarcane/ maize electricity/diesel
should be ensured by
the Govt. agencies.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg crop/cropping systemh Implementationj
Non release of Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Arabic Rice Limited irrigation, Seed through KSSC and
water in canals irrigated canal sandy Sorghum/Maize Sorghum /Bajra Alternate furrow NFSM,
under delayed loam soil /Pigeonpea/Blackgram irrigation, Supply of inter cultural
onset of Drip irrigation, implements through
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane
monsoon in Mulching RKVY
catchment Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/ Limited irrigation, Seed through KSSC and
irrigated canal clay loam Blackgram/Greengram Alternatefurrow NFSM,
soil Sorghum Fodder Bajra/Sorghum Fodder irrigation, Harvesting and threshing
Drip irrigation, implements through
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane
Mulching RKVY
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
13
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg crop/cropping systemh Implementationj
Lack of Not Applicable
inflows into
tanks due to
insufficient
/delayed onset
of monsoon
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh measuresi Implementationj
Insufficient Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice Limited irrigation, Seed through KSSC and
groundwater irrigated canal sandy /Vegetable Alternatefurrow NFSM,
recharge due loam soil (cucurbits)/Blackgram irrigation, Harvesting and threshing
to low rainfall Sorghum/Maize Bajra /Pigeonpea/ Blackgram Drip irrigation, implements through
Mulching RKVY
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane
Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Greengram/ Blackgram Limited irrigation, Seed through KSSC and
irrigated canal clay Sorghum Fodder Bajra Fodder Alternatefurrow NFSM,
loam soil irrigation, Micro/drip/sprinkler
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane
Drip irrigation, irrigation under govt.
Mulching schemes,
Supply of inter cultural
implements through
RKVY
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short Vegetative stagek Flowering stagel Crop maturity stagem Post harvestn
span leading to water logging
Maize + Blackgram / Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place & dispose
Greengram /cucurbits Harvesting at physiological of produce as early as
maturity stage possible
14
Sugarcane Provide drainage Supply to sugar mills
/crusher as early as possible
Drain out excess water and or shift to safer place and
harvest the lodged crop as cover the cane with trash
early as possible materials
Blackgram or Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water
Safe storage against storage
Harvesting at physiological
maturity stage. pest and disease
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
of produce as early as
Picking of vegetables at possible
physiological maturity stage
Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place & dispose
Harvesting at physiological of produce as early as
maturity stage and picking of possible
cucurbits crop.
Brinjal Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
of produce as early as
Picking at physiological possible
maturity stage
Tomato Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose
of produce as early as
Picking at physiological possible
Provide drainage maturity stage
Mango - Spray of 2% urea + -
- Carbendazim 0.02% solution
Guava - Spray of 2% urea +
- Carbendazim 0.02% solution -
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in
a short span2
Sugarcane Earthing up,
Drain out excess water and Supply to sugar mills
Tying harvest the lodged crop as /crusher as early as possible
early as possible or shift to safer place and
15
cover the cane with trash
materials
Maize/Sorghum Provide drainage, Drain out excess water &
Use Wind breaks Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage maturity stage of produce as early as
possible
Blackgram/ Greengram Provide drainage, Shift to safer place & dispose
Use Wind breaks Drain out excess water & of produce as early as
Provide drainage Harvesting at physiological possible
maturity stage
Rice (basmati) Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage Harvesting at physiological of produce as early as
maturity stage possible
Pigeonpea Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage Harvesting at physiological of produce as early as
Sowing on raised bed maturity stage possible
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage, Harvesting at physiological of produce as early as
Sowing on raised bed maturity stage possible
Brinjal Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage, Harvesting at physio- of produce as early as
Sowing on raised bed logical maturity stage possible
Tomato Provide drainage, Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place & dispose
Provide drainage Use Wind breaks, Harvesting at physio- of produce as early as
Sowing on raised bed Stacking logical maturity stage possible
Stacking Stacking
Cauliflower Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place & dispose
Sowing on raised bed Harvesting at physio- of produce as early as
16
logical maturity stage possible
Cucurbits Provide drainage Drain out excess water ,
Provide drainage, Harvesting at physio-
Shift to safer place & dispose
Sowing on raised bed logical maturity stage of produce as early as
possible
Mango Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use of wind breaks -
Guava Use of wind breaks Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to
unseasonal rains
Rice (basmati) Need based plant Shift to safer place & dispose
Avoid use of pesticide at
protection IPDM for of produce as early as
Sugarcane Need based plant
Rice/pluses maturity stage possible
protection IPDM for
Sorghum fodder
Rice/pluses
Blackgram/ Greengram
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra Need based plant Avoid use of pesticide at Shift to safer place & dispose
Brinjal protection IPDM for maturity stage of produce as early as
Rice/pluses possible
Tomato
Need based plant
Cucurbits protection IPDM for
Rice/pluses
Cauliflower
17
2.3. Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice (basmati) • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Sugarcane • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Sorghum fodder • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Blackgram/ Greengram • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Pigeonpea • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Continuous submergence for more than 2 days
Rice • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
18
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Mango • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Sea water intrusion3 Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone/Fog
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measurer
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice (basmati) • Re sowing of nursery • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent
• Light and frequent irrigation decreased decreased irrigation
during night
Sugarcane • Mulching • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent
decreased decreased irrigation
Sorghum fodder • Re sowing • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Make silage
decreased decreased
19
Blackgram /Greengram • Re sowing • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
• Mulching survival
Pigeonpea • Re sowing • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
• Mulching survival
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching of nursery beds
• Light irrigation during night
Mango • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water • -
Guava • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water • -
Cold waveq
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation
Sugarcane • Light irrigation for -- • Harvesting of
survival cane
Horticulture
Tomato • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Harvesting of
fruits
Pea • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Harvesting of
fruits
Potato • Light Sprinkler irrigation -- • Harvesting
Frost
Sugarcane • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Harvesting of
cane
20
Pigeonpea • Light irrigation • Light irrigation Smoke at night
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Horticulture
Potato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Tomato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • De halming
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Pea • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Mango • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night --
night night
Guava • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night Harvesting
night night
Hailstorm
All the crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Horticulture
All the Vegetable crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Use anti hail net Use anti hail net Use anti hail net Harvest the damaged
All the Fruit crops Spray of fungicide with 2% urea Spray of fungicide with 2% Spray of fungicide with 2% urea fruits
solution urea solution solution Spray of fungicide with
2% urea solution
Fog Not applicable
21
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
• Utilizing fodder from perennial
• Availing crop insurance
trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for
small ruminant. • Cultivation of fast growing
• Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, green fodder crops.
feed blocks & mixture etc. • Development of drought
• Fodder crop Insurance
• Migration of herd /flock to other resistance fodder.
• Making of feed blocks
Feed and fodder places. • Increase the no. of Fodder
availability • Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Establishment of communication and Banks for future use.
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, Subabul),
linkage with other state agencies.
specially on bunds and wasteland
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder crops in
irrigated area
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of drought resistant
crops and their varieties of fodder crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler irrigation system.
• Training to the farmers and extension functionaries for
production and long term storage of feed and fodder.
• Preserving water in the pond/tank for drinking purpose. • Using preserved water in the tanks for
Drinking water • Excavation of bore well/creation of tanks or ponds. drinking • Recharge of well/ Tanks
• De-silting of village ponds on regular basis and adopt • Available ground water should be used etc.
for drinking on priority basis.
water harvesting techniques through water shed
22
approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube well water during
lean period.
• Conduction mass animal health camp
• Farmers should be encouraged to avail Livestock and treating the effected animals. • Availing insurance benefits.
Health and disease insurance • Mass campaigning though different • Followed standard Livestock
management • Training to livestock owners regarding natural media regarding possible outbreak of management practices.
calamities. diseases and their management. • Proper health care & treatment.
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and vaccines.
• Vaccination
Floods
• Availing crop insurance
Feed and fodder • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Cultivation of fast growing green
availability tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. fodder crops
• Fodder crop Insurance • Use of feed mixture/block hay etc
• Making of feed blocks • Migration of flock /herds
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Establishment of communication and
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, Subabul), linkage with other state agencies
specially on bunds and wasteland
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder crops.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder and that should
be stored on up land.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of crops and their
varieties () of fodder crops for water logged conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension functionaries for
production and long term storage of feed and fodder.
23
• Making suitable provision for safe drinking surface • Open sources of drinking
Drinking water • Contaminated flood water should not
water including excavation of bore well/hand pump water (tank/well) should be
be used for drinking.
(India mark—II) at community level. further treated with potassium
• Make farmers aware not to use contaminated/ flood per magnate.
water for drinking purpose.
• Conduction mass animal health camp
and Health disease and treating the effected animals. • Culling sick animals
management • Live stock Insurance
• Training to livestock owners regarding • Availing insurance benefits.
• Training to livestock owners regarding natural natural calamities. • Culling unproductive
calamities.
• Establishment of Co-ordination with livestock
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and vaccines. other Agencies. • Proper disposal of corpse of
• Vaccination • Use of mass media to spread expat dead bodies to prevent the
advice spread of contagious
diseases.
Cyclone Not Applicable
Heat wave and
cold wave
• Repair and maintenance
• Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in the animal shed • Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins in the
of additional facilities
• Create adequate sources for additional supply of animal sheds to protect against direct
water to protect the animals from heat waves. entry of hot/ cold waves
• Establishment of modern shelter sheds. • Provide proper bedding to prevent from
Shelter/environment • As far as possible grow shade trees such as Neem, cold and proper ventilation to prevent
management from heat.
Pilkhan, Karanj etc near the animal sheds.
• Make provision for adequate no. of fans/coolers
• Provide drinking water to animal
frequently during heat wave
/heaters according to the situation, if possible
• Watch the forecast of weather
department.
• As for as possible the animal should be
allowed to allow in pounds/ canals/
river or give bath once or twice in a day
24
during heat waves
• Organize village level animal health
camps • Proper after care of animals.
Health and disease • Insure the animals • Consult veterinary officer immediately • Availing insurance benefits.
management if any adverse symptoms are noticed
• Training to livestock owners/ para-vets regarding • Proper disposal of corpse of
preventive measure against extreme weather conditions • Use of ITKs for food supplements dead bodies to prevent the
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and vaccines spread of contagious diseases.
etc.
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold
s based on forewarning wherever available
25
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages
with ongoing programs,
Suggested contingency measures if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
• Use of feed concentrates/
Shortage of feed • Making and storage of feed mixture/blocks etc • Availing insurance
concentrates
ingredients • Establishment of • Increase the no. of feed
• Awareness regarding traditional communication with other state
banks for future use
feed banks. agencies.
• Feed requirement data should be • Use of locally available feed
generated recourses.
• Prepare the feed requirement data • Import the feed recourse form
base of poultry farm. other states.
• Store the feed ingredients
• Making extra facility for
Drinking water • Frequent supply of drinking water
drinking water.
• Repair & maintenance of water
resources
• Culling of flock
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with
management medicines and vaccines. • Treatment of affected poultry birds • Availing insurance
benefits
• Vaccination
• Proper disposal of
• Training to poultry
corpse of dead bodies to
Growers regarding natural prevent the pared of
calamities. contagious diseases
26
Floods
Shortage of feed
ingredients
• Sufficient quantity • Use of stored feed in • Cleaning of feed store
of feed ingredients should be balanced form
& repair if any.
stored • Prevent the feed from • Moist feed should be
moisture.
dried &treated as per
requirement
• Repair,
maintenance and
cleaning of water
recourse
• Make provision of ground water • Use only Ground water obtained • Sanitation of
Drinking water for drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell open Wells
• Availing insurance
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with benefits.
management medicines and vaccines • Migration of flock if required • Culling of
• Vaccination • Treatment unproductive flock
Cyclone Not Applicable
• Storage and making of feed
Shortage of feed concentrates • Establishment of communication • Repair and maintenance
ingredients • Proper feed requirement data with other state agencies of feed store
base • Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other areas
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water • Use only Ground water obtained • Repair and maintenance
for drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell of water recourse
Health and disease • Training to poultry growers • Culling of flock
management • Treatment of injured poultry birds.
regarding natural calamities. • Availing insurance
• Veterinary preparedness with benefits.
medicines and vaccines. • Proper disposal of corpse
27
of dead bodies to prevent
the pared of contagious
diseases.
Heat wave and cold
wave
• Keep the birds in appropriate shelter
• Making sufficient provision of • Making of modern shelter
Shelter/environment shelter to protect live stock from • Provide proper bedding to prevent sheds
management heat and cold waves from cold and proper ventilated to • Increase the plantation of
prevent from heat
• Establishment of alternate trees
• Provide drinking water to birds
resource for water supply.
frequently.
• Modern shelter sheds.
• Adopted proper management
practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
• Availing insurance
benefits
• Insurance • Provide proper treatment as per • Culling of unproductive
flock
requirement
H m e a a n l a t g h e a m nd en d t i sease • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of injured poultry • Proper disposal of corpse
medicines and vaccines
of dead bodies to prevent
• Training to poultry growers the pared of contagious
regarding natural calamities diseases
a based on forewarning wherever available
28
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine _ _ _
Inland
(i) Shallow water depth due to • Adopt appropriate measures to • Harvest the crop partially • Re stock
insufficient rains/inflow
reduce water seepage or infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen
• Regular observation to check the • Maintain appropriate level of water
• Churning of pond water
water quality and remove the if possible
pollutants if any. • Check the water quality and remove
the pollutants if any.
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Ensure the Oxygen availability
insufficient rains/inflow into ponds for the survival of
• Adopt appropriate measures to fish
reduce water seepage or infiltration • Avoid any kind of water • Maintain appropriate level of water
from ponds pollution in ponds
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution • Add oxy-flow to improve • Check the water quality and remove
and maintain water pH oxygen into ponds. the pollutants if any.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in • Add some fresh water from other • Add oxy-flow to improve • Add fresh water into pond for life
ponds / change in water quality source like cannel etc oxygen into ponds. saving and to reduce salt load
• Churning of pond water • Maintain appropriate level of
• Add fresh water into pond for water in ponds
life saving and to reduce salt • Check the water quality and
load remove the pollutants if any.
2) Floods
29
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
• Close supervision of flood
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged • Boats, nets etc should be taken out condition • Damaged boat or nets should be
from water bodies repaired
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _ • Repair the damaged house.
• Sanitation and proper disposal of
(iii) Loss of stock _ _
corpse
(iv) Changes in water quality • Increase the height of bunds. -- --
(v) Health and diseases -- • Treatment if possible --
B. Aquaculture
• Repair the bunds to prevent the
inflow of water • Repair the damaged bunds
• Avoid inflow of flood water
• If inflow water is not polluted • Check water quality
from outside.
then place the net at inlet and
(i) Inundation with flood water outlet • If inflow water is not polluted • Change the water if it is polluted
that can be permitted to flow
• Raise the height of bunds
through net placed at inlet and
• Plan a proper drainage system at outlet of pond.
farm • Fencing of net required in case
• Plantation of soil binding plants of overflow to avoid the
at bund migration of fish
• Maintain appropriate level of
(ii) Water contamination and • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Stop inflow of contaminated water in ponds
changes in water quality water • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any.
(iii) Health and diseases • Diagnostic measures and provide • Limeing and medication as per
• Limeing @300 kg/ha appropriate medicines
requirement
• Vaccination • Use Cifex to control ulcerative
30
syndromes
• Immediately remove the dead
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
• Marketable stock should be sold
fishes from ponds and do
chemicals etc) sanitation • After sanitation add new stock
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Dommageable infrastructures • Do not supplié Electric in flood • Repaire and service the damage
aerators, huts etc) should be secured éd area infrastructure
3. Cyclone / Tsunami Not applicable
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
B. Aquaculture
• Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of
water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m
(i) Changes in pond deep ponds deep ponds deep ponds
environment (water quality) • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any
i) Health and Disease management • Limeing@300kg/ha • Medication as per requirement
• Remove the dead fishes from
ponds and add new stocks to
compensate the production
a based on forewarning wherever available
31