State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Moradabad
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Northern Plain, Hot Subhumib (Dry) Eco-Region (9.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Upper Gangetic Plain Region (V)
Commission)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Bhabar And Terai Zone (UP-2)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Pilibhit, Bareilly, Rampur, Moradabad, Shahjanpur, Badaun, Bijnor, Jyotibaphule Nagar
Zone*
(*>50% area falling in the zone)
Geographic coordinates of district Latitude Longitude Altitude
headquarters
280 50’ 33.826” N 780 46’ 48.535”E 885 mt.
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ -
ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district K.V.K, Rushatam Nagar, Bilari, Moradabad of S.V.P.U. A & T, Meerut
with address
Name and address of the nearest Agromet S.V.P.U. A & T, GB Pant University of Agriculture & Technology, Pantnagar
Field Unit (AMFU, IMD) for agro-
advisories in the Zone
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number) ( specify week and month) (specify week and month)
SW monsoon (June-Sep) 815 54 2nd week of June 3rd week of September
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec) 38 12 3rd week of December 2nd week of January
Winter (Jan- March) 66 14 - -
Summer (Apr-May) 24 7 - -
Annual 943 87 - -
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land under Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland Misc. tree uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural crops and land
statistics) use groves
Area (‘000 ha) 375.979 315.451 0.064 42.449 0.429 1.519 2.368 3.226 2.368 2.386
1. 4 Major Soils Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total
Sandy loam soils 89.43 28.35
Loam soils 102.71 32.56
Clay loam soils 101.61 32.21
Silt loam soils 20.19 6.4
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity %
Net sown area 315.451 177.80%
Area sown more than once 245.421
Gross cropped area 560.872
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 260.575
Gross irrigated area 490.930
Rainfed area 54.876
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 10.718 4.11 %
2
Tanks 0.120 0.046 %
Open wells 121.038 46.45 %
Bore wells 124.337 47.77 %
Lift irrigation schemes - -
Micro-irrigation - -
Other sources 4.362 1.67 %
Total Irrigated Area 260.575
Pump sets
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils
Department /Board) Block-13
Over exploited 3 6.60, 8.96 Not reported
Critical 3 7.45,6.86,8.05 do
Semi- critical 5 - do
Safe 2 - do
Wastewater availability and use - - do
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures of 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated Kharif Rabi Summer
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Grand total
Rice 102.00 18.321 120.321 38.14 - - - 120.321
Wheat - - - 200.496 - 200.496 - 200.496
Sugarcane - - - 68.437 - 68.437 - 68.437
Maize - 2.148 2.148 - - - - 2.148
Mustard - - - 3.000 7.400 10.400 - 10.400
Toria - - - 5.439 8.556 13.995 - 13.995
Lentil - - - - 1.590 1.590 - 1.590
3
Horticulture crops - Fruits Area (‘000 ha)
Total Irrigated Rainfed
Mango 9.230 5.538 3.692
Guava 1.590 0.954 0.637
Horticulture crops -
Vegetables
potato 9.179 9.179 -
Cucurbits 7.321 7.321 -
Pea 0.350 0.350 -
Medicinal and Aromatic
crops
Mentha 2.321 2.321 -
Others 0.567 0.567 -
Plantation crops
Eucalyptus 6.258 - 6.258
Poplar 9.517 9.517 -
Fodder crops
Sorghum 16.325 4.200 12.125
Bajra 4.158 - 4.158
Berseem 4.562 4.562 -
Total fodder crop area 25.046 8.762 16.283
Grazing land 0.128 - 0.128
Sericulture etc - - -
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding) 109.913 255.984 365.897
Improved cattle & Crossbred cattle 16.715 44.138 60.853
Non descriptive Buffaloes 126.315 482.786 609.102
Descript Buffaloes 54.135 206.908 261.043
Goat 55.947 106.969 162.916
Sheep(Indigenous + Exotic ) (1.773+.444) 2.217 (3.491+.0333) 3.824 6.041
4
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak etc.) 1140.380
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial 1 50.00
Backyard (41.231+50.799) 92.030
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Fisheries Department) facilities (Ice
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized (Shore plants etc.)
mechanized (Trawl nets, Seines, Stake & trap
Gill nets) nets)
- - - - -
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000 tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - -
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department)
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years: 2008-09)
1.11 Name of crop Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
residue as
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
fodder
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
(‘000
tons)
5
Major Field crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
Rice 279.506 2323 - - - - 279.506 2323 290.69
Maize 3.209 1494 - - - - 3.209 1494 1.80
Wheat - - 646.600 3225 - - 646.600 3225 808.25
Sugarcane - - 4085.141 596920 - - 4085.141 596920 612.77
Mustard - - 11.220 1079 - - 11.220 1079 -
Toria - - 12.846 918 - - 12.846 918 -
Major Horticultural crops (Crops identified based on total acreage)
Lentil - - 1.242 781 - - 1.242 781 1.74
Mentha - - 0.214 162 - - 0.214 162 -
Mango - - - - - - 115.609 12525 -
Potato - - 235.294 25634 - - 235.294 25634 -
Pea - - 5.337 15250 - - 5.337 15250 -
Cucurbits 118.97 162500 - - - - 118.97 162500 -
1.12 Sowing window for 5
major field crops Rice Wheat Sugarcane Toria/ Mustard Mentha
Kharif- Rainfed June-July - - - -
Kharif-Irrigated June-July - October - -
Rabi- Rainfed - November - - September- -
December October
Rabi-Irrigated - November - March-April October January-March
December
6
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Flood √
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √
Cold wave √
Frost √
Sea water intrusion √
Sheath Blight, Stemborrer, Pyrilla Loos smut, Heliothis, Rust etc white grub. √
Fog
1.14 Include Digital maps of Location map of district within State as Annexure- I Enclosed: Yes
the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure- II Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure- III Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
Annexure II
9
Annexure III
Tarai (1-3% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy over
sandy skeletal soils
2. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
3. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded .
4. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty soils .
5. Deep, fine soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils .
6. Deep, loamy soils, moderate salinity and sodicity associated with
loamy soils with moderate salinity and strong sodicity
7. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils
with moderate salinity and sodicity and moderate water logging.
8. Deep, silty soils associated with loamy soils slightly eroded .
Old Alluvial plain with river left out channels/Oxbows/point bars (1-3%
slope)
9. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with stratified
loamy soils slightly eroded
Old Alluvial Plain with occasional sandunes (1-3% slope).
10. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with sandy soils
and moderately eroded
11. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy over
sandy soils and moderately eroded
Active Flood Plain (1-3% slope)
12. Deep, sandy soils with moderate flooding associated with stratified
loamy soils and slight flooding .
10
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping systemc Agronomic measuresd Remarks on
drought situationa Cropping systemb including variety Implementatione
(delayed onset)
Delay by 2 Deep soil, Maize/ Sorghum/ Bajra/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, Azad Conservation furrow, Seed-drill under
weeks yellow color Pigeonpea utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga 2,11 Samrat Inter-cultivation, RKVY,
alluvial loam etc Sowing with multi seed Supply of seed
4th week of June soils Sorghum: CSH 14, 16, CSB 13, 15, SPB dril,l through govt.
1338 etc Wider spacing for agencies ie.
Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322 pigeonpea NFSM,
ICMH-451 RKVY
Pigeonpea: UPAS 120, ICPL 151,Pusa 33
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping systemc Agronomic measuresd Remarks on
drought situationa systemb Implementatione
(delayed onset)
Delay by 4 Deep soil, Maize/ Bajra/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, Azad Conservation furrow, Seed-drill under
weeks yellow color Sesame/Blackgram utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga 2,11 Samrat Inter-cultivation, RKVY,
alluvial loam etc Sowing with multi seed Supply of seed
2nd week of soils Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322 drill through govt.
July ICMH-451 agencies ie.
Sesame: Pergati, shekar, TA-78, TA-12 NFSM
Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1, Pant U-
30, 19, 35 etc
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping systemc Agronomic Remarks on
drought situationa systemb measuresd Implementation
Delay by 6 Deep soil, Blackgram/Greengram / Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1, Pant U- Sowing with multi
weeks yellow colored Bajra 30, 19, 35 seed drill
alluvial loam
4th week of July soils Greengram: Pant Mung bean -2, 3,
Narender mung -1, 4, SML-668, PDM-11
11
Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322
ICMH-451
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
drought situationa systemc measuresd Implementatione
Delay by 8 Deep soil, Toria Toria: P.T.-30, 507, 303, Conservation Seed-drill under
weeks yellow colored Bhawani, T-9 furrow, RKVY,
alluvial loam Inter-cultivation, Supply of seed
2nd week of soils Sowing with multi through govt.
August seed drill agencies ie.
NFSM
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Crop / Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on Implementation
drought Farming Cropping system conservation measures
(Normal situationa
onset)
Normal onset Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ 1. Thining, weeding and gap Inter cultivation, Supply of inter cultural
followed by upland Sorghum (Fodder) filling in existing crop. Conservation furrow, implements through RKVY,
15-20 days dry 2. Re sowing Thinning and weeding, Farm ponds through IWSM
spell after 3. Selection/nursery sowing Mulching programme,
sowing leading of short duration rice cultivar Pulse crop seeds supply through
to poor NFSM
germination/cr
op stand etc.
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/
lowland Sorghum (Fodder)
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/
upland Pigeonpea
Un irrigated Blackgram/ Greengram
lowland
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on Implementation
12
drought (long Farming systemb conservation measures
dry spell, situationa
consecutive 2
weeks rainless
(>2.5 mm)
period)
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Thinning, weeding and gap Inter cultivation, Supply of inter cultural
At vegetative upland Sorghum (Fodder) filling in existing crop, Conservation furrow, implements through RKVY,
stage Re sowing, Thinning and weeding, Farm ponds through IWSM
Postponement of top dressing Mulching programme,
of Urea, Pulse crop seeds supply through
Life saving irrigation NFSM,
Micro/drip/sprinkler irrigation
under govt. schemes
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/
lowland Sorghum (Fodder)
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/
upland Pigeonpea
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Bajra/
lowland Til/ Pigeonpea
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
drought (long Farming moisture conservation Implementation
dry spell) situation measures
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Sorghum Thining, weeding and gap filling Conservation furrow, Farm ponds
At flowering/ upland (Fodder) in existing crop, Thinning and weeding, through IWSM
fruiting stage Life saving irrigation, Mulching, programme
Weeding and weed mulching Urea spray
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum
lowland (Fodder)
13
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Pigeonpea
upland
Un irrigated Bajra/ Til
lowland
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping systemb Crop management Rabi crop Remarks on
Farming planning Implementation
situationa
Terminal Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Sorghum Life saving irrigation, Toria/mustard, Farm ponds through
drought upland (Fodder) Picking/harvesting of pods/ear, Potato, IWSM programme,
(Early Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum Harvest at physiological maturity Pea/Chickpea, Supply of seed through
withdrawal of lowland (Fodder) stage , Barseem/oat ISOPM,
monsoon) Harvest for fodder Harvesting and threshing
implements through
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Pigeonpea
RKVY,
upland
Supply of land lazer labeler
through CLDP or RKVY
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Bajra/ Til
lowland
2.1.2 Drought -Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping systemh Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
Farming systemg Implementationj
situationf
14
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping systemh Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
Farming systemg Implementationj
situationf
Delayed Upland sandy Rice (Basmati)-Wheat Replace rice with maize or aerobic rice Light irrigation with tube • Seed through
release of loam soils well water, KSSC and NFSM
water in canals Use short duration varieties e.g. Follow alternate wetting and • Adequate supply of
due to low Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, PRH 10 drying schedule of irrigation electricity/
rainfall Maize: Kanchan, Sweta, Navin, Surya in rice, diesel should be
Bajra:WCC-75, Raj-171, Pusa-23, Alternate Furrow irrigation, ensured by the Govt.
Pusa-322 Mulching in sugarcane/ agencies.
maize
Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- Bajra/Greengram/ Blackgram - Potato/
Potato/ Wheat Wheat
Sugarcane +cucurbits – No change
Ratoon-Wheat
Lowland clay Rice-wheat Basmati rice –Wheat Light irrigation with tube
loam soils Use short duration varieties e.g. well water,
Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, PRH 10 Follow alternate wetting and
Sorghum fodder-Wheat Bajra-Wheat drying schedule of irrigation
Bajra:WCC-75, Raj-171, Pusa-23, in rice,
Pusa-322 Alternate Furrow irrigation,
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change Mulching in sugarcane
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
Farming systemg systemh Implementationj
situationf
Limited Upland sandy Rice (Basmati)-Wheat No change Follow alternate wetting and • Adequate supply of
release of loam soils Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- No change drying schedule of irrigation in electricity/diesel should
water in canals rice, be ensured by the Govt.
Potato/ Wheat
due to low Alternate Furrow irrigation, agencies.
rainfall Sugarcane +cucurbits – No change Mulching in sugarcane/ • Supply of inter cultural
Ratoon-Wheat maize implements through
Lowland clay Rice-wheat No change Follow alternate wetting and RKV
loam soils Sorghum Fodder-Wheat No change drying schedule of irrigation in
15
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping systemh Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
Farming systemg Implementationj
situationf
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change rice, .
Alternate Furrow irrigation,
Mulching in sugarcane/
maize
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping systemh Agronomic Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping measuresi Implementationj
systemg
Non release of Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice Limited irrigation, • Seed through KSSC
water in canals Upland tube well Sorghum/Maize Bajra /Pigeonpea/Blackgram Alternate furrow and NFSM
under delayed irrigated canal sandy irrigation, • Supply of inter cultural
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane
onset of loam soil Drip irrigation, implements through
monsoon in Mulching RKVY
catchment
Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengram Limited irrigation
irrigated canal clay Sorghum Fodder Bajra/Sorghum Fodder Alternate furrow
loam soil irrigation
Sugarcane + Sugarcane
Drip irrigation
cucurbits
Mulching
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
Lack of
inflows into Not Applicable
tanks due to
insufficient
/delayed onset
of monsoon
16
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf systemg systemh Implementationj
Insufficient Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice Limited irrigation Seed through KSSC and
groundwater irrigated canal sandy /Vegetables (Tomato, Alternate furrow NFSM,
recharge due loam soil Brinjal, cucrbits etc) irrigation Harvesting and threshing
to low rainfall Sorghum/Maize Bajra Drip irrigation implements through
/Pigeonpea/Blackgram Mulching RKVY
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane
Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengra Limited irrigation,
irrigated canal clay m Alternate furrow
loam soil Sorghum Fodder Bajra/Sorghum Fodder irrigation,
Drip irrigation,
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane
Mulching
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a Vegetative stagek Flowering stagel Crop maturity stagem Post harvestn
short span leading to water
logging
Maize + Blackgram / Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting Shift to safer place &
/cucurbits at physiological maturity stage dispose of produce as early
as possible
Sugarcane Provide drainage Supply to sugar mills
Drain out excess water and harvest
/crusher as early as
the lodged crop as early as possible
possible or shift to safer
place and cover the cane
with trash materials
Blackgram or Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Safe storage against
Drain out excess water, Harvesting
at physiological maturity stage. storage pest and disease
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking of vegetables at Shift to safer place &
17
physiological maturity stage dispose of produce as early
as possible
Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
Drain out excess water & dispose of produce as early
Harvesting at physiological maturity as possible
stage and picking of cucurbits crop.
Brinjal Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as early
Picking at physiological maturity as possible
stage
Tomato Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
dispose of produce as early
Picking at physiological maturity as possible
Provide drainage stage
Mango - Spray of 2% urea + Carbendazim -
- 0.02% solution
Guava - Spray of 2% urea + Carbendazim
- 0.02% solution -
Heavy rainfall with high speed
winds in a short span2
Drain out excess water and harvest
Supply to sugar mills
Sugarcane the lodged crop as early as possible
/crusher as early as
Earthing up
possible or shift to safer
Tying place and cover the cane
with trash materials
Maize/Sorghum Provide drainage, Drain out excess water, Harvesting Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage Use wind breaks at physiological maturity stage dispose of produce as early
as possible
Blackgram/ Greengram Provide drainage, Shift to safer place &
Use wind breaks Drain out excess water, Harvesting dispose of produce as early
Provide drainage at physiological maturity stage
as possible
Rice basmati Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting Shift to safer place &
18
at physiological maturity stage dispose of produce as early
as possible
Pigeonpea Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage, Drain out excess water, Harvesting dispose of produce as early
Sowing on raised bed at physiological maturity stage
as possible
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage, Drain out excess water ,Harvesting dispose of produce as early
Sowing on raised bed at physiological maturity stage
as possible
Brinjal Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage, Drain out excess water ,Harvesting dispose of produce as early
Sowing on raised bed at physiological maturity stage
as possible
Tomato Provide drainage, Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage, Use wind breaks, Drain out excess water , Harvesting dispose of produce as early
Sowing on raised bed, at physiological maturity stage,
Stacking as possible
Stacking Stacking
Cauliflower Provide drainage Shift to safer place &
Drain out excess water, Harvesting dispose of produce as early
Provide drainage, at physiological maturity stage
as possible
Sowing on raised bed
Cucurbits Provide drainage, Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting Shift to safer place &
Sowing on raised bed at physiological maturity stage dispose of produce as early
as possible
Mango Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use Wind breaks -
Guava Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use Wind breaks -
Outbreak of pests and diseases
due to unseasonal rains
Rice basmati Need based plant protection Need based plant Do not use strong pesticide at Shift to safer place &
19
Sugarcane IPDM for Rice/pluses protection IPDM for maturity stage dispose of produce as early
Sorghum fodder
Rice/pluses as possible
Blackgram/ Greengram
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra Need based plant Shift to safer place &
Do not use strong pesticide at
Need based plant protection protection IPDM for dispose of produce as early
Brinjal maturity stage
IPDM for Rice/pluses Rice/pluses as possible
Tomato
Cucurbits
Cauliflower
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice (basmati) • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Sugarcane • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Sorghum fodder • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Blackgram/ Greengram • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Pigeonpea • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
20
produce as early as possible
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Continuous submergence Shift to safer place & dispose of
for more than 2 days2 produce as early as possible
Rice • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Mango • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
21
• Re transplanting produce as early as possible
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone/Fog
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measurer
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wavep
Rice basmati • Re sowing of nursery • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased Light and frequent
• Light and frequent irrigation decreased irrigation
during night
Sugarcane • Mulching • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased Light and frequent
decreased irrigation
Sorghum fodder • Re sowing • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Make silage
decreased decreased
Blackgram /Greengram • Re sowing • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
• Mulching survival
Pigeonpea • Re sowing • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
• Mulching survival
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
22
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of
• Re transplanting survival fruits
• Mulching of nursery beds
• Light irrigation during night
Mango • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water
Guava • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water
Cold waveq
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation
Sugarcane • Light irrigation for -- Harvesting of cane
survival
Horticulture
Tomato • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light Sprinkler irrigation Harvesting of fruits
Pea • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light Sprinkler irrigation Harvesting of fruits
Potato • Light Sprinkler irrigation -- Harvesting
Frost
Sugarcane • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Light irrigation Harvesting of cane
Pigeonpea • Grow as inter crop • Light irrigation • Light irrigation Smoke at night
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Horticulture
Potato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Tomato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival De halming
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Pea • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
23
Mango • Irrigation &Smoking during night • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night --
night
Guava • Irrigation &Smoking during night • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night Harvesting
night
Hailstorm
All the crops Re sowing Re sowing of catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Horticulture
All the Vegetable crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Use anti hail net, Use anti hail net Use anti hail net, Harvest the damaged
All the Fruit crops Spray of fungicide with 2% urea Spray of fungicide with 2% urea Spray of fungicide with 2% urea fruits
solution solution solution Spray of fungicide with
2% urea solution
Fog
24
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
• Availing crop insurance
• Utilizing fodder from perennial • Cultivation of fast
• Fodder crop Insurance
trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for small growing green fodder
• Making of feed blocks ruminant. crops.
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, feed • Development of drought
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, blocks & mixture etc. resistance fodder.
Feed and fodder Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland • Migration of herd /flock to other places. • Increase the no. of fodder
availability • Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder • Establishment of communication and linkage Banks for future use.
crops in irrigated area
with other state agencies.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned
deptt.
• Seed production and development of drought
resistant crops and their varieties of fodder crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler irrigation
system.
• Training to the farmers and extension functionaries
for production and long term storage of feed and
fodder.
Drinking water • Preserving water in the pond/tank for drinking • Using preserved water in the tanks for drinking • Recharge of well/
purpose. • Available ground water should be used for Tanks etc.
• Excavation of bore well/creation of tanks or ponds. drinking on priority basis.
25
• De-silting of village ponds on regular basis and
adopt water harvesting techniques through water
shed approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube well water
during lean period.
• Availing insurance
benefits.
• Farmers should be encouraged to avail livestock • Conduction mass animal health camp and • Followed standard
insurance treating the effected animals. Livestock management
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Mass campaigning though different media practices.
management calamities. regarding possible outbreak of diseases and their • Proper health care &
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and management. treatment.
vaccines.
• Vaccination
Floods
• Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
• Making of feed blocks tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. • Cultivation of fast growing
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Use of feed mixture/block hay etc green fodder crops
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass,
• Migration of flock /herds
Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland
Feed and fodder • Establishment of communication and linkage
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder
availability with other state agencies
crops.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder and that
should be stored on up land.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned
deptt.
• Seed production and development of crops and
their varieties of fodder crops for water logged
conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension functionaries
26
for production and long term storage of feed and
fodder.
• Contaminated flood water should not be used • Open sources of
drinking water
Drinking water for drinking.
(tank/well ) should be
further treated with
• Making suitable provision for safe drinking surface
potassium per magnate.
water including excavation of bore well/hand
pump (India mark—II) at community level.
• Make farmers aware not to use contaminated/ flood
water for drinking purpose.
• Culling sick animals
Health and disease • Live stock Insurance • Conduction mass animal health camp and • Availing insurance
management
• Training to livestock owners regarding natural treating the effected animals. benefits.
calamities. • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Culling unproductive
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and calamities. livestock
vaccines. • Establishment of Co-ordination with other • Proper disposal of
• Vaccination Agencies. corpse of dead bodies
• Use of mass media to spread expat advice to prevent the spread of
contagious diseases.
Cyclone
Not Applicable
Heat wave and cold
wave
27
Shelter/environment • Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in the animal • Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins/ rags in the • Repair and
management shed animal sheds to protect against direct entry of maintenance of
• Create adequate sources for additional supply of hot/ cold waves additional facilities
water to protect the animals from heat waves. • Provide proper bedding to prevent from cold and
• Establishment of modern shelter sheds. proper ventilation to prevent from heat.
• As far as possible grow shade trees such as • Provide drinking water to animal frequently
during heat wave
Neem, Pilkhan, Karanj etc near the animal sheds.
• Make provision for adequate no. of fans/coolers • Watch the forecast of weather department.
/heaters according to the situation, if possible • As for as possible the animal should be allowed
to wallow in pounds/ canals/ river or give bath
once or twice in a day during heat waves
• Proper after care of
• Organize village level animal health camps animals.
• Insure the animals
Health and disease • Consult veterinary officer immediately if any • Availing insurance
• Training to livestock owners/ para-vets regarding benefits.
management adverse symptoms are noticed
preventive measure against extreme weather
conditions • Use of ITKs for food supplements • Proper disposal of corpse
of dead bodies to prevent
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and the spread of contagious
vaccines etc. diseases.
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold
s based on forewarning wherever available
28
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages
with ongoing programs,
Suggested contingency measures if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed • Making and storage of feed • Use of feed concentrates/ • Availing insurance
ingredients concentrates mixture/blocks etc • Increase the no. of feed
• Awareness regarding traditional feed • Establishment of banks for future use
banks.
communication with other state
• Feed requirement data should be agencies.
generated • Use of locally available feed
• Prepare the feed requirement data recourses.
base of poultry farm. • Import the feed recourse form
• Store the feed ingredients other states.
• Making extra facility for drinking
Drinking water • Frequent supply of drinking water
water.
• Repair & maintenance of water
resources
Health and disease
management • Treatment of affected poultry birds • Culling of flock
• Veterinary preparedness with • Availing insurance
medicines and vaccines. benefits
• Vaccination • Proper disposal of
corpse of dead bodies to
• Training to poultry
prevent the pared of
Growers regarding natural calamities. contagious diseases
Floods
29
Shortage of feed • Sufficient quantity of • Use of stored feed in • Cleaning of feed store
ingredients feed ingredients should be stored balanced form & repair if any.
• Prevent the feed from • Moist feed should be
moisture. dried &treated as per
requirement
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water for • Use only Ground water obtained • Repair,
drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell maintenance and
cleaning of water
recourse
• Sanitation of open
Wells
• Availing insurance
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with benefits.
management medicines and vaccines • Migration of flock if required • Culling of
• Vaccination unproductive flock
Cyclone Not Applicable
Shortage of feed • Storage and making of feed • Establishment of communication • Repair and maintenance
ingredients concentrates with other state agencies of feed store
• Proper feed requirement data base • Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other areas
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water for • Use only Ground water obtained • Repair and maintenance
drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell of water recourse
• Training to poultry growers regarding
• Culling of flock
Health and disease natural calamities.
management • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of injured poultry birds. • Availing insurance
benefits.
medicines and vaccines.
• Proper disposal of corpse
of dead bodies to prevent
the pared of contagious
30
diseases.
Heat wave and
cold wave
Shelter/environme • Making sufficient provision of shelter • Keep the birds in appropriate • Making of modern shelter
nt management to protect live stock from heat and shelter sheds
cold waves • Provide proper bedding to prevent • Increase the plantation of
• Establishment of alternate resource from cold and proper ventilated to trees
for water supply. prevent from heat
• Modern shelter sheds. • Provide drinking water to birds
frequently.
• Adopted proper management
practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
Health and disease • Insurance • Provide proper treatment as per • Availing insurance
management • Veterinary preparedness with requirement benefits
medicines and vaccines • Treatment of injured poultry • Culling of unproductive
• Training to poultry growers flock
regarding natural calamities • Proper disposal of corpse
of dead bodies to prevent
the pared of contagious
diseases
a based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
31
Marine _ _ _
Inland
(i) Shallow water depth due to • Adopt appropriate measures to • Harvest the crop partially • Re stock
insufficient rains/inflow
reduce water seepage or infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen
• Regular observation to check the • Maintain appropriate level of water if
• Churning of pond water
water quality and remove the possible
pollutants if any. • Check the water quality and remove the
pollutants if any.
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Ensure the Oxygen availability
insufficient rains/inflow into ponds for the survival of
• Adopt appropriate measures to fish
reduce water seepage or infiltration • Avoid any kind of water • Maintain appropriate level of water in
from ponds pollution ponds
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution • Add oxy-flow to improve • Check the water quality and remove the
and maintain water pH oxygen into ponds. pollutants if any.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in • Add some fresh water from other • Add oxy-flow to improve • Add fresh water into pond for life
ponds / change in water quality source like cannel etc oxygen into ponds. saving and to reduce salt load
• Churning of pond water • Maintain appropriate level of water in
• Add fresh water into pond for ponds
life saving and to reduce salt • Check the water quality and remove
load the pollutants if any.
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
• Close supervision of flood
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged • Boats, nets etc should be taken out condition • Damaged boat or nets should be
from water bodies repaired
32
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _ • Repair the damaged house.
(iii) Loss of stock _ _ • Sanitation and proper disposal of corpse
(iv) Changes in water quality • Increase the height of bunds. -- --
(v) Health and diseases -- • Treatment if possible --
B. Aquaculture
• Repair the bunds to prevent the
inflow of water • Repair the damaged bunds
• Avoid inflow of flood water
• If inflow water is not polluted • Check water quality
from outside.
then place the net at inlet and
(i) Inundation with flood water outlet • If inflow water is not polluted • Change the water if it is polluted
that can be permitted to flow
• Raise the height of bunds
through net placed at inlet and
• Plan a proper drainage system at outlet of pond.
farm • Fencing of net required in case
• Plantation of soil binding plants of overflow to avoid the
at bund migration of fish
• Maintain appropriate level of water in
(ii) Water contamination and • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Stop inflow of contaminated ponds
changes in water quality water • Check the water quality and remove
the pollutants if any.
(iii) Health and diseases • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Diagnostic measures and provide • Limeing and medication as per
• Vaccination appropriate medicines
requirement
• Use Cifex to control ulcerative
syndromes
• Immediately remove the dead
• Marketable stock should be sold
fishes from ponds and do
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
sanitation • After sanitation add new stock
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Dommageable infrastructures • Do not supplié Electric in flood • Repaire and service the damage
33
aerators, huts etc) should be secured éd area infrastructure
3. Cyclone / Tsunami Not Applicable
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
B. Aquaculture
• Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of
water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m • Maintain appropriate level of water in
(i) Changes in pond deep ponds deep ponds ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m deep ponds
environment (water quality) • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and remove
remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any the pollutants if any
i) Health and Disease management • Limeing@300kg/ha • Medication as per requirement
• Remove the dead fishes from ponds
and add new stocks to compensate
the production
a based on forewarning wherever available
34