State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Muzaffarnagar
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Northern Plain, Hot Subhumib (Dry) Eco-Region (9.1)
UPPER GANGETIC PLAIN REGION UPPER GANGETIC PLAIN REGION (V)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) BHABAR AND TERAI ZONE (UP-2) & WESTERN PLAIN ZONE(UP-3)
List all the districts falling under the Meerut, Saharanpur, G.B.Nagar, Bulandshhar, Ghaziabad. Bagpat
NARP Zone*
(*>50% area falling in the zone)
Geographic coordinates of district Latitude Longitude Altitude
headquarters
290 460 N 770 31’ E 232 mt
. .
Name and address of the concerned Regional sugarcane research institute, Muzaffar nagar
ZRS/ ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district Swami Kalyan Dav K.V.K. Begra M. Nagar of S.V.P.U.A.T Meerut
with address
Name and address of the nearest S.V.P.U.A.T Meerut
Agromet Field Unit (AMFU, IMD) for
agro-advisories in the Zone
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number) ( specify week and (specify week and
month) month)
SW monsoon (June-Sep) 639.5 47 4th Week of June 2nd Week of Sep
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec) 32.7 12 3rd Week of Dec 2nd Week of Jan
Winter (Jan- March) 65.8 13 - -
Summer (Apr-May) 20.6 7 - -
1
Annual 785.6 79 - -
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural use Misc. tree land
statistics) crops and
groves
Area (‘000 ha) 421.473 326.920 27.707 50.003 0.385 2.314 2.207 4.271 5.122 2.544
1. 4 Major Soils Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total
1. Sandy Loam 106.32 32.52
2. Loam 119.59 36.58
3. Clay Loam 59.27 18.13
4.Silty Loam 39.23 12.00
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity %
Net sown area 326.920 144.08%
Area sown more than once 144.118
Gross cropped area 471.038
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 325.453
Gross irrigated area 466.916
Rainfed area 1.467
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 71.320 21.8 %
Tanks 0.004 .001 %
Open wells 3.522 1.077 %
Bore wells 250.601 76.655 %
Lift irrigation schemes NIL -
Micro-irrigation 0.22 %
Other sources (please specify) 0.006
Total Irrigated Area 326.18 -
Pump sets
2
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* No. of (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem such as
(Data source: State/Central Ground blocks/ high levels of arsenic, fluoride, saline etc)
water Department /Board) Tehsils
Block-13
Over exploited - - Not reported
Critical Shapur 1 10.33 do
Semi- critical 2 - do
Safe 10 - do
Wastewater availability and use - - do
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures, 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated Kharif Rabi
Grand
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer
total
Rice 35.635 - 35.635 - - - - 35.635
Wheat - - - 130.61 - 130.61 - 130.61
Sugarcane - - - 224.740 - 224.740 - 224.740
Maize 0.279 - 0.279 - - - - 0.279
Blackgram/Greengram - 0.87 0.87 - - - - 0.87
Mustard - - - 1.939 1.025 2.964 - 2.964
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits Total Irrigated Rainfed
Horticulture crops - Total Irrigated Rainfed
Vegetables
Potato 2.653 2.653 -
Pea 0.116 0.166 -
Medicinal and Total Irrigated Rainfed
Aromatic crops
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Eg., industrial
3
pulpwood crops etc.
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 82.536 20.200 62.436
Pearl millet 3.216 - 3.216
Berseem 5.235 5.235 -
Maize 8.215 8.215 -
Total fodder crop 99.202 33.56 65.652
area
Grazing land - - -
Sericulture etc - - -
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding) 30.127 223.313 253.440
Improved cattle
Crossbred cattle 31.654 130.147 161.701
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) 151.012 547.897 698.910
Descript Buffaloes 64.719 234.813 299.532
Goat 23.105 45.602 68.707
Sheep 4.91+0.147=5.057 8.192+0.184=8.376 13.434
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak etc.) 1126.296
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial 0 0. 231
Backyard 26,602+34,360 = 60,962
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Fisheries Department) facilities
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized (Ice plants
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake & etc.)
Gill nets) trap nets)
- - - - - -
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
4
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000
tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - -
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department)
Others - - -
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years: 2008-09 )
1.11 Name of crop Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
residue
Production Productivit Production Productivity Production Productivi Productio Productivity as
('000 t) y (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) ty (kg/ha) n ('000 t) (kg/ha) fodder
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Rice 92.794 2604 - - - - 92.794 2604 64.735
Wheat - - 428.927 3284 - - 428.927 3284 514.68
Sugarcane - - 15205.908 67660 - - - 15205.908 67660 2280.75
Maize 0.283 1014 - - - - 0.283 1014 0.0483
Blackgram/Greengram - - - - 0.501 576 0.501 576 0.742
Mustard - - 3.337 1126 - - 2.337 1126
Major Horticultural crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits Total Irrigated Rainfed
Horticulture crops - Total Irrigated Rainfed
Vegetables
Potato 2.653 2.653 -
Pea 0.116 0.166 -
Medicinal and Total Irrigated Rainfed
5
Aromatic crops
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Eg., industrial pulpwood
crops etc.
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 82.536 20.200 62.436
Pearl millet 3.216 - 3.216
Berseem 5.235 5.235 -
Maize 8.215 8.215 -
Total fodder crop area 99.202 33.56 65.652
Grazing land - - -
Sericulture etc - - -
1.12 Sowing window for 5
major field crops Blackgram/
Rice Wheat Sugarcane Maize
(start and end of normal Greengram
sowing period)
Kharif- Rainfed - - - June June- July
Kharif-Irrigated June- July - - June March - April
Rabi- Rainfed - Nov-Dec - - -
Rabi-Irrigated - Nov-Dec April - June - -
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought x √
Flood x x √
Cyclone x x √
Hail storm x √ x
Heat wave x √ x
Cold wave x √ x
Frost x √ x
Sea water intrusion x x
Pests and disease outbreak (specify) Pyrilla ,Shoot borer, Sheath Blight, white grub, √ x x
loose smut etc
Fog x x
6
1.14 Include Digital maps Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
of the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: No
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
Soil map
Legend Description
1 &5 Deep, loamy soils (moderately salinity
and sodicity)
2 Deep, loamy soils and silty soils
3 Deep, silty soils and loamy soils (slightly
saline and slightly sodic).
4 Deep, silty soils and loamy soils
6 Deep, loamy soils and loamy/sandy soils
7 Deep, sandy soils (slightly flooding) and
loamy soils
8 Deep, loamy soils and loamy soils
(moderate flooding)
9
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rain fed situation (Rain fed area is negligible, so there is no need of contingencies)
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming situation Normal Crop / Cropping system Change in crop / cropping Agronomic Remarks on
drought system including variety measures Implementatio
(delayed onset) n
Delay by 2
weeks
2nd week of
July
Delay by 4
weeks
4th week of
July
Delay by 6
weeks
2nd week of
August
Delay by 8
weeks
4th week of
August
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season drought Major Normal Crop / Cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
(Normal onset) Farming moisture conservation Implementation
situation measures
Normal onset 1 ) Farming
followed by 15-20 situation:
days dry spell after
sowing leading to
poor
germination/crop
stand etc.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season drought Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
(long dry spell, Farming moisture conservation Implementation
10
consecutive 2 weeks situation measures
rainless (>2.5 mm)
period)
1 ) Farming
At vegetative stage situation:
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season drought Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
(long dry spell) Farming moisture conservation Implementation
situation measures
At flowering/ fruiting 1 ) Farming
stage situation:
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Rabi crop planning Remarks on
Farming Implementation
situation
Terminal drought 1 ) Farming
(Early withdrawal of situation:
monsoon)
1.1.2. Drought Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Delayed Up land sandy loam Rice (Basmati)-Wheat Replace rice with maize or • Use short duration • Seed through
release of soils aerobic rice varieties e.g. KSSC and
water in canals Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- Pearl millet/Greengram/ Rice: PS 4, 5 N FSM
due to low Potato/ Wheat Blackgram - Potato/ Wheat PB -1, PRH -10 • Adequate supply
rainfall Maize: Kanchan, of
Sugarcane +cucurbits –Ratoon- No change required
Sweta, Navin, Surya electricity/diesel
Wheat
Pearl millet:Wcc- should be
75,Raj-171,Pusa- ensured by the
23,Pusa-322 Govt. agencies.
• Light irrigation with
tube well water
• Follow alternate
wetting and drying
schedule of irrigation
in rice
11
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
• Alternate Furrow
irrigation
• Mulching in
sugarcane/maize
Low land clay loam Rice-wheat Basmati rice -Wheat • Use short duration • Seed through
soils Sorghum Fodder-Wheat Pearl millet-Wheat varieties e.g. KSSC and
Rice: PS 4, 5, PB NFSM
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change
1, PRH 10 • Adequate supply
Maize:Kanchan, of
Sweta, Navin, Surya electricity/diesel
Pearl millet should be
(Fodder): Wcc- ensured by the
75,Raj-171,Pusa- Govt. agencies.
23,Pusa-322
• Light irrigation with
tube well water
• Follow alternate
wetting and drying
schedule of irrigation
in rice
• Alternate Furrow
irrigation
• Mulching in
sugarcane
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Limited Up land sandy loam Rice (Basmati)-Wheat No change • Light irrigation with • Adequate
release of soils Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- No change tube well water at supply of
water in canals critical stages only electricity/
Potato/ Wheat
due to low e.g CRI, Tillering diesel should
Sugarcane +cucurbits –Ratoon- No change
rainfall &.Flowering stage be ensured by
Wheat • Follow alternate the Govt.
wetting and drying agencies.
schedule of irrigation
in rice
• Alternate Furrow
irrigation
• Mulching in
sugarcane/
• maize
12
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Low land clay loam Rice-wheat No change • Light irrigation with • Supply of inter
soils Sorghum Fodder-Wheat No change tube well water at cultural
critical stages only implements
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change
e.g CRI, Tillering through RKV
&.Flowering stage • Adequate supply
• Follow alternate of
wetting and drying electricity/diesel
schedule of irrigation should be
in rice ensured by the
• Alternate Furrow Govt. agencies.
irrigation
• Mulching in
sugarcane
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Delayed Up land tube well Basmati rice Maize/Arabic Rice • Limited irrigation • Seed through
release of irrigated canal sandy Sorghum/Maize Pearl millet • Alternate Furrow KSSC and
water in canals loam soil /Pigeonpea/Blackgram irrigation NFSM
due to low Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane • Drip irrigation • Harvesting and
rainfall • Mulching threshing
implements
through RKVY
Low land tube well Rice Pearl • Limited irrigation • Seed through
irrigated canal clay millet/Blackgram/Greengram • Alternate Furrow KSSC and
loam soil Sorghum Fodder Pearl millet/Sorghum Fodder irrigation NFSM
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane • Drip irrigation • Micro/drip/spri
• Mulching nkler irrigation
• Alternate furrow under govt.
irrigation schemes
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Limited Up land tube well Basmati rice Maize/Arabic Rice • Limited irrigation • Seed through
release of irrigated canal sandy Sorghum/Maize Pearl millet • Alternate Furrow KSSC and
water in canals loam soil /Pigeonpea/Blackgram irrigation NFSM
due to low Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane • Drip irrigation
rainfall • Mulching
13
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Lowland tube well Rice Pearl • Limited irrigation • Seed through
irrigated canal clay millet/Blackgram/Greengram • Alternate Furrow KSSC and
loam soil Sorghum Fodder Pearl millet/Sorghum Fodder irrigation NFSM
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane • Drip irrigation • Supply of inter
• Mulching cultural
• Alternate furrow implements
irrigation through RKV
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Non release of Up land tube well Basmati rice Maize/Arabic Rice • Limited irrigation • Seed through
water in canals irrigated canal sandy Sorghum/Maize Pearl millet • Alternate Furrow KSSC and
under delayed loam soil /Pigeonpea/Blackgram irrigation NFSM
onset of Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane • Drip irrigation • Supply of inter
monsoon in • Mulching cultural
catchment implements
through RKVY
•
2) Farming situation : Rice Pearl • Limited irrigation • Seed through
Lowland tube well millet/Blackgram/Greengram • Alternate Furrow KSSC and
irrigated canal clay Sorghum Fodder Pearl millet/Sorghum Fodder irrigation NFSM
loam soil Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane • Drip irrigation • Harvesting and
• Mulching threshing
• Alternate furrow implements
irrigation through RKVY
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Lack of NA NA NA
inflows into
tanks due to
insufficient
/delayed onset
of monsoon
14
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
situation system system measures Implementation
Insufficient Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Arabic Rice /Vegetable • Limited irrigation • Seed through KSSC
groundwater irrigated canal sandy (Tomato, Brinjal, cucrbits etc) • Alternate Furrow and NFSM
recharge due loam soil Sorghum/Maize Pearl millet / Pigeonpea/ irrigation • Harvesting and
to low rainfall Blackgram • Drip irrigation threshing
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane • Mulching implements through
RKVY
Lowland tube well Rice Pearl millet/ Blackgram/ • Limited irrigation • Seed through KSSC
irrigated canal clay Greengram • Alternate Furrow and NFSM
loam soil Sorghum Fodder Pearl millet/Sorghum Fodder irrigation • Micro/drip/sprinkler
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane • Drip irrigation irrigation under govt.
• Mulching schemes
• Alternate furrow • Supply of inter
irrigation cultural implements
through RKVY
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short span Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
leading to water logging
Maize + Blackgram /Greengram / Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out, Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
cucurbits maturity stage
Sugarcane +Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out, Harvesting at
physiological maturity stage and Shift to safer place
Picking of cucurbits crop.
Blackgram/ Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Safe storage against storage
Drain out , Harvesting at
physiological maturity stage. pest and disease
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking of vegetables at physiological Shift to safer place
maturity stage
Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at
physiological maturity stage and Shift to safer place
picking of cucurbits crop.
Brinjal Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking at physiological maturity Shift to safer place
stage
15
Tomato Provide drainage Picking at physiological maturity Shift to safer place
Provide drainage stage
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in
a short span
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in
a short span
Sugarcane • Earthing Provide drainage
Drain out &Harvesting at
• Tying Use Wind breaks physiological maturity stage Shift to safer place
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks
Maize/Sorghum Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at
Provide drainage Use Wind breaks physiological maturity stage
Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Blackgram/ Greengram Provide drainage Drain out& Harvesting at
Provide drainage Use Wind breaks physiological maturity stage
Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Rice basmati Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at
Provide drainage Use Wind breaks physiological maturity stage
Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Pigeonpea • Provide drainage Provide drainage
Drain out & Harvesting at
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks physiological maturity stage Shift to safer place
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks
Horticulture
Okra • Provide drainage Provide drainage
Drain out Harvesting at physiological
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks maturity stage
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Brinjal • Provide drainage Provide drainage
Drain out Harvesting at physiological
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks maturity stage
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Tomato • Provide drainage Provide drainage
Drain out Harvesting at physiological
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks maturity stage
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Cauliflower • Provide drainage Provide drainage
Drain out Harvesting at physiological
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks maturity stage
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to
unseasonal rains
Rice basmati Need based plant Do not use Hazardous pesticide at Shift to safer place
Need based plant
Sugarcane protection IPDM for protection IPDM for maturity stage
16
Sorghum fodder Rice/pluses Rice/pluses
Blackgram/ Greengram
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra Need based plant Need based plant
Do not use Hazardous pesticide at
protection IPDM for protection IPDM for Shift to safer place
Brinjal maturity stage
Rice/pluses Rice/pluses
Tomato
Cucurbits
2.3 Floods
Condition o
Suggested contingency measure
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation
Rice basmati • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Direct sowing of rice
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Sugarcane • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
•
Sorghum fodder • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
•
Blackgram/ Greengram • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
•
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Re sowing of nursery
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
17
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Continuous submergence
for more than 2 days
Rice • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Direct sowing of rice
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Horticulture NA NA NA NA
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Sea water intrusion NA NA NA NA
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone/Fog
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measurer
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice basmati • Re sowing of nursery • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased Light and frequent
• Light and frequent irrigation decreased irrigation
during night
Sugarcane • Mulching • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased Light and frequent
decreased irrigation
Sorghum fodder • Re sowing • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased Make silage
decreased
Blackgram /Greengram • Re sowing • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
• Mulching
• Re sowing • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
18
Pigeonpea • Mulching
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching of nursery beds
• Light irrigation during night
Cold wave
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation
Sugarcane • Mulching • Light irrigation -- • Harvesting of cane
Horticulture
Tomato Grow some inter crop • Light Sprinkler irrigation -- • Harvesting of fruits
Pea Grow some inter crop • Light Sprinkler irrigation -- • Harvesting of fruits
Potato Grow some inter crop • Light Sprinkler irrigation -- • Harvesting
Frost
Sugarcane • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Harvesting of cane
Pigeonpea • Grow as inter crop • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light irrigation for survival Smoke at night
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Horticulture
Potato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Tomato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • De helming
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Pea • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
19
Hailstorm
All the crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Horticulture
All the Vegetable crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Fog
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
Drought
• Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
• Fodder crop Insurance trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for small • Cultivation of fast growing
• Making of feed blocks ruminant. green fodder crops.
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, feed • Development of drought
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, blocks & mixture etc. resistance fodder.
Feed and fodder Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland • Migration of herd /flock to other places. • Increase the no. of Fodder
availability • Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder • Establishment of communication and linkage Banks for future use.
crops in irrigated area with other state agencies.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned
deptt.
• Seed production and development of drought
resistant crops and their varieties of fodder crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler irrigation
system.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long term storage
of feed and fodder.
• Preserving water in the pond/tank for drinking
Drinking water purpose. • Using preserved water in the tanks for drinking • Recharge of well/ Tanks etc.
• Excavation of bore well/creation of tanks or • Available ground water should be used for
20
ponds. drinking on priority basis.
• De-silting of village ponds on regular basis and
adopt water harvesting techniques through water
shed approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube well water
during lean period.
• Farmers should be encouraged to avail Livestock • Conduction mass animal health camp and
• Availing insurance benefits.
insurance treating the effected animals.
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Mass campaigning though different media • Followed standard Livestock
management calamities. regarding possible outbreak of diseases and their management practices.
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and management. • Proper health care & treatment.
vaccines.
• Vaccination
Floods
• Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial
• Making of feed blocks tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. • Availing crop insurance
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Use of feed mixture/block hay etc • Cultivation of fast growing green
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, • Migration of flock /herds fodder crops
Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland • Establishment of communication and linkage
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder with other state agencies
crops.
Feed and fodder
availability • Making silage or hay of excess fodder and that
should be stored on up land.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned
deptt.
• Seed production and development of crops and
their varieties of fodder crops for water logged
conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long term storage
of feed and fodder.
Drinking water • Contaminated flood water should not be used • Open sources of drinking
• Making suitable provision for safe drinking for drinking. water (tank/well ) should be
surface water including excavation of bore further treated with potassium
well/hand pump (India mark—II) at community per magnate.
level.
• Make farmers aware not to use contaminated/
flood water for drinking purpose.
21
Health and disease • Live stock Insurance • Conduction mass animal health camp and • Culling sick animals
management
• Training to livestock owners regarding natural treating the effected animals. • Availing insurance benefits.
calamities. • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Culling unproductive
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and calamities. livestock
vaccines. • Establishment of Co-ordination with other • Proper disposal of corpse of
• Vaccination Agencies.
dead bodies to prevent the
• • Use of mass media to spread expat advice spread of contagious
• . diseases.
Cyclone
N.A N.A N.A N.A
Heat wave and
cold wave
• Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in the animal • Repair and maintenance
shed • Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins/ rags in the of additional facilities
• Create adequate sources for additional supply of animal sheds to protect against direct entry of
water to protect the animals from heat waves. hot/ cold waves
Shelter/environment
• Establishment of modern shelter sheds. • Provide proper bedding to prevent from cold
management
and proper ventilation to prevent from heat.
• As far as possible grow shade trees such as
Neem, Pilkhan, Karanj etc near the animal • Provide drinking water to animal frequently
sheds. during heat wave
• Make provision for adequate no. of fans/coolers • Watch the forecast of weather department.
/heaters according to the situation, if possible • As for as possible the animal should be allowed
to wallow in pounds/ canals/ river or give bath
once or twice in a day during heat waves
• Insure the animals
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners/ para-vets regarding • Organize village level animal health camps • Proper after care of animals.
management preventive measure against extreme weather • Consult veterinary officer immediately if any • Availing insurance benefits.
conditions
adverse symptoms are noticed
• Proper disposal of corpse of
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and • Use of ITKs for food supplements dead bodies to prevent the
vaccines etc. spread of contagious diseases.
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold
s
based on forewarning wherever available
22
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages
with ongoing
Suggested contingency measures programs, if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed • Making and storage of feed • Use of feed concentrates/ • Availing insurance
concentrates
ingredients • Awareness regarding traditional feed mixture/blocks etc • Increase the no. of feed banks for
future use
banks. • Establishment of communication with
• Feed requirement data should be other state agencies.
generated • Use of locally available feed recourses.
• Prepare the feed requirement data • Import the feed recourse form other
base of poultry farm. states.
• Store the feed ingredients
• Making extra facility for drinking
Drinking water • Frequent supply of drinking water
water.
• Repair & maintenance of water
resources
Health and disease
management • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of affected poultry birds • Culling of flock
medicines and vaccines.
• Availing insurance benefits
• Vaccination
• Proper disposal of corpse of dead
• Training to poultry
bodies to prevent the pared of
Growers regarding natural calamities. contagious diseases
Floods
Shortage of feed • Sufficient quantity of feed • Cleaning of feed store & repair
ingredients ingredients should be stored • Use of stored feed in balanced form
if any.
• Prevent the feed from moisture. • Moist feed should be dried
&treated as per requirement
23
• Repair, maintenance and cleaning
• Make provision of ground water for • Use only Ground water obtained from of water recourse
Drinking water drinking India Mrka II or Tubewell • Sanitation of open Wells
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with
management medicines and vaccines • Migration of flock if required • Availing insurance benefits.
• Vaccination • Treatment • Culling of unproductive flock
Cyclone NA NA NA
Shortage of feed • Storage and making of feed • Establishment of communication with • Repair and maintenance of feed
ingredients concentrates other state agencies store
• Proper feed requirement data base • Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other areas
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water for • Use only Ground water obtained from • Repair and maintenance of
drinking India Mrka II or Tubewell water recourse
• Training to poultry growers regarding
Health and disease natural calamities. • Culling of flock
management • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of injured poultry birds. • Availing insurance benefits.
medicines and vaccines.
• Proper disposal of corpse of dead
bodies to prevent the pared of
contagious diseases.
Heat wave and cold
wave
• Making sufficient provision of shelter • Keep the birds in appropriate shelter
Shelter/environment to protect live stock from heat and
management cold waves • Provide proper bedding to prevent from • Making of modern shelter sheds
• Establishment of alternate resource c fr o o l m d a h n e d a t p roper ventilated to prevent • Increase the plantation of trees
for water supply.
• Provide drinking water to birds
• Modern shelter sheds. frequently.
• Adopted proper management practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
Health and disease • Insurance • Provide proper treatment as per • Availing insurance benefits •
management • Veterinary preparedness with requirement • Culling of unproductive flock
medicines and vaccines • Treatment of injured poultry • Proper disposal of corpse of dead
24
• Training to poultry growers bodies to prevent the pared of
regarding natural calamities contagious diseases
a based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
(i) Shallow water depth due to insufficient
• Adopt appropriate measures to reduce • Harvest the crop partially • Re stock
rains/inflow
water seepage or infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen • Maintain appropriate level of
• Regular observation to check the water • Churning of pond water water if possible
• Check the water quality and
quality and remove the pollutants if any.
remove the pollutants if any.
(iii) Any other _ _ _
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Ensure the Oxygen availability into
insufficient rains/inflow • Adopt appropriate measures to reduce ponds for the survival of fish • Maintain appropriate level of
water seepage or infiltration from ponds • Avoid any kind of water pollution water in ponds
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen • Check the water quality and
and maintain water pH into ponds. remove the pollutants if any.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in ponds / • Add fresh water into pond for
change in water quality • Add some fresh water from other source life saving and to reduce salt
like cannel etc • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen load
into ponds. • Maintain appropriate level of
• Churning of pond water water in ponds
• Add fresh water into pond for life • Check the water quality and
saving and to reduce salt load remove the pollutants if any.
_
(iii) Any other
_ --
2) Floods
A. Capture
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged • Boats, nets etc should be taken out from • Close supervision of flood condition • Damaged boat or nets should be
water bodies repaired
25
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _ • Repair the damaged house.
• Sanitation and proper disposal of
(iii) Loss of stock _ _
corpse
(iv) Changes in water quality • Increase the hight of bunds. -- --
(v) Health and diseases -- • Treatment if possible --
B. Aquaculture
• Repair the damaged bunds
• Repair the bunds to prevent the • Check water quality
inflow of water
• Avoid inflow of flood water from • Change the water if it is
• If inflow water is not polluted then
(i) Inundation with flood water outside. polluted
place the net at inlet and outlet
• If inflow water is not polluted that
• Raise the height of bunds
can be permitted to flow through net
• Plan a proper drainage system at placed at inlet and outlet of pond.
farm • Fencing of net required in case of
• Plantation of soil binding plants at overflow to avoid the migration of
bund fish
• Maintain appropriate level of
• Limeing @300 kg/ha
(ii) Water contamination and changes water in ponds
in water quality • Stop inflow of contaminated water • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any.
(iii) Health and diseases • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Diagnostic measures and provide • Limeing and medication as per
• Vaccination appropriate medicines
requirement
• Use Cifex to control ulcerative
syndromes
• Marketable stock should be sold • Immediately remove the dead fishes
from ponds and do sanitation • After sanitation add new stock
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Damageable infrastructures should be • Do not supplié Electric in flood éd • Repaire and service the damage
aerators, huts etc) secured area infrastructure
(vi) Any other
3. Cyclone / Tsunami NA NA NA
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
B. Aquaculture
26
• Maintain appropriate level of water • Maintain appropriate level of
• Maintain appropriate level of water in in ponds i.e. 1.75m in 2m deep water in ponds i.e. 1.75m in
ponds i.e. 1.75m in 2m deep ponds ponds 2m deep ponds
(i) Changes in pond environment (water
quality) • Check the water quality and remove • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and
the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any
• Remove the dead fishes from
i) Health and Disease management • Limeing@300kg/ha • Medication as per requirement
ponds and add new stocks to
compensate
• the production
27