State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Pilibhit
District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Northern Plain, Hot Subhumib (Dry) Eco-Region (9.2)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning UPPER GANGETIC PLAIN REGION (V)
Commission)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) MID WESTERN PLAIN ZONE (UP-4)
List all the districts falling under the Pilibhit, Bareilly, Muradabad, Shahjanpur, Badaun, Bijnor, Rampur, Jyotibaphule Nagar
NARP Zone*
(*>50% area falling in the zone)
Geographic coordinates of district Latitude Longitude Altitude
headquarters
280 33’ 31.824” N 780 3’ 13.018”E 171 mt.
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ Nil
ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district K.V.K, Tanda Bijesi New Aria Pilibhit of S.V.P.U. A & T, Meerut
with address
Name and address of the nearest Agromet I.V.R.I. Bareilly & G.B.P. University Pantnagar
Field Unit (AMFU, IMD) for agro-
advisories in the Zone
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number) ( specify week and (specify week and
month) month)
SW monsoon (June-Sep): 1085.4 70 2nd week of June 3rd week of Sept
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec): 50.7 14 3rd week of Dec 2nd week of Jan
Winter (Jan- March) 74 16 - -
Summer (Apr-May) 31.9 7 - -
1
Annual 1242 107 - -
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural use Misc. land
statistics) tree
crops
and
groves
Area (‘000 ha) 378.315 239.014 80.010 41.535 0.259 3.250 4.482 6.881 1.097 1.787
1. 4 Major Soils Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total
1. Sandy loam 25.69 10.75
2. Loam 68.26 28.56
3. Clay loam 101.46 42.45
4. Silt loam 41.23 17.25
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity %
Net sown area 239.014 167.56%
Area sown more than once 161.478
Gross cropped area 400.492
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 231.439
Gross irrigated area 387.109
Rainfed area 7.575
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 40.492 18.41%
Tanks 0.100 0.04%
Open wells 0.545 0.248%
Bore wells 178.600 81.21%
Lift irrigation schemes NIL - -
Micro-irrigation - -
Other sources (please specify) 0.176 0.08%
Total Irrigated Area 219.913
Pump sets
2
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils such as high levels of arsenic, fluoride,
Department /Board) Block-7 saline etc)
Over exploited - - Not reported
Critical - - do
Semi- critical 2 - do
Safe 5 - do
Wastewater availability and use - - do
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures, 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated
Kharif Rabi
Grand
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer
total
Rice 154.810 - 154810 - - - - 154.810
Wheat - - - 155.015 - 155.015 - 155.015
Sugarcane - - - 52.083 - 52.083 - 52.083
Sesame - 1.307 1.307 - - - - 1.307
Mustard - - - - 9.552 9.552 - 9.552
Toria - - -- 13.995 - 13.995 - 13.995
Lentil - - - - 2.558 2.558 - 2.558
Blackgram - 0.169 0.169 - - - - 0.169
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits Total Irrigated Rainfed
Mango 1.481 0.888 0.592
3
Muskmelon 0.166 0.099 0.0664
Horticulture crops - Total Irrigated Rainfed
Vegetables
Potato 0.638 0.638 -
Pea 0.240 0.240 -
Medicinal and Total Irrigated Rainfed
Aromatic crops
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Poplar 15.856 15.856 -
Eucliptus 2.75 - 2.75
Eg., industrial
pulpwood crops etc.
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 36.365 16.152 20.204
Pearl millet 3.218 - 3.218
Berseem 4.892 4.892 -
Total fodder crop 44.466 21.044 23.442
area
Grazing land - - -
Sericulture etc - - -
Others (specify) - - -
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding) 64.686 168.692 233.378
Crossbred cattle & Improved cattle 2.957 7.935 10.892
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) 51.713 149.072 200.786
Descript Buffaloes 22.163 63.883 86.051
Goat 25.841 64.024 89.865
Sheep( Indigenous + Exotic ) .688+.015 1.167+.070 1.940
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak etc.) 486.746
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial 0 0
Backyard 22.051+28.158=50.209
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
4
Fisheries Department) Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized facilities (Ice
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake & plants etc.)
Gill nets) trap nets)
- - - - -
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000 tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - -
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department) - - -
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years: 2008-09)
1.11 Name of crop Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
residue as
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity fodder (‘000
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) tons)
Major Field crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Rice 403.280 2605 - - - - 403.280 2605 515.84
Wheat - - 564.565 3642 - - 564.565 3642 677.478
Sugarcane - - 3010.397 57800 - - 3010.397 57800 451.545
Sesame 97 - - - - 0.127 97 -
Mustard - - 8.469 887 - - 8.469 887 -
Toria - - 12.846 918 - - 12.846 918 -
Major Horticultural crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Pea - - 14.335 22469 - - 14.335 22469 -
Potato - - 3.612 15050 - - 3.612 15050 -
Mango - - - - - - 7.798 5265
5
Muskmelon - - - - - - 4.316 26000
1.12 Sowing window for 5
major field crops Sesame
Rice Wheat Sugarcane Toria Mustard
(start and end of normal &Blackgram
sowing period)
Kharif- Rainfed July - - - - -
Kharif-Irrigated June-July - - July - -
Rabi- Rainfed - Nov-Dec March-April - September Oct
Rabi-Irrigated - Nov-Dec March-April - September Oct-Nov
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought x √ x
Flood x √ x
Cyclone x x √
Hail storm x √ x
Heat wave x √ x
Cold wave x √ x
Frost x √ x
Sea water intrusion x x √
Pests and disease outbreak (specify)Sheath blight, Stem borer, Pyrilla, Rust, Loose √ x x
smut etc.
Others (specify) Fog √ x x
1.14 Include Digital maps Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
of the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: No
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
6
Annexure I
7
Soil map
1. Deep, loamy soils and silty soils
2. Deep, loamy soils.
3. Deep, loamy soils and silty soils .
4. Deep, fine soils and loamy soils .
5. Deep, loamy soils and loamy soils
6. Deep, loamy soils and sandy soils
7. Deep, loamy soils (moderate water logging and
slight salinity) and fine soils(slightly water
logging) .
8. Deep, loamy soils (severely flooding and slight
salinity/sodicity).
9. Deep, sandy soils (moderate flooding) and
loamy soils(slight flooding)
10. Deep, stratified loamy soils, with moderate
flooding associated with sandy soils with
moderate flooding .
8
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rain fed situation (Rain fed area is negligible, so there is no need of contingencies)
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping system Change in crop / cropping Agronomic Remarks on
drought situation system including variety measures Implementatio
(delayed onset) n
Delay by 2
weeks
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
drought situation system measures Implementatio
(delayed onset) n
Delay by 4
weeks
4th week of
June
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
drought situation system measures Implementatio
n
Delay by 6
weeks
2nd week of
July
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
drought situation system measures Implementatio
n
Delay by 8
weeks
4th week of
July
9
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season drought Major Normal Crop / Cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
(Normal onset) Farming moisture conservation Implementation
situation measures
Normal onset
followed by 15-20
days dry spell after
sowing leading to
poor
germination/crop
stand etc.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season drought Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
(long dry spell, Farming moisture conservation Implementation
consecutive 2 weeks situation measures
rainless (>2.5 mm)
period)
At vegetative stage
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season drought Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
(long dry spell) Farming moisture conservation Implementation
situation measures
At flowering/ fruiting
stage
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Rabi crop planning Remarks on
Farming Implementation
situation
Terminal drought
(Early withdrawal of
monsoon)
10
1.1.2. Drought Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Delayed Up land sandy loam Rice (Basmati)-Wheat Replace rice with maize or • Use short duration varieties • Seed through
release of soils aerobic rice Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, PRH 10 KSSC and
water in Sorghum (Fodder) Pearl millet/Greengram/ Maize: Kanchan, Sweta, Navin, NFSM
canals due to /Maize-Potato/ Wheat Blackgram - Potato/ Wheat Surya • Adequate supply
low rainfall Pearl millet: Wcc-75, Raj-171, of electricity/
Sugarcane +Cucurbits – No change
Pusa-23, Pusa-322 diesel should be
Ratoon-Wheat • Light irrigation with tube ensured by the
well water Govt. agencies.
• Follow alternate wetting and
drying schedule of irrigation
in rice
• Alternate Furrow irrigation
• Mulching in sugarcane /
maize
Low land clay loam Rice-wheat Basmati rice -Wheat • Use short duration varieties • Seed through
soils Sorghum Fodder-Wheat Pearl millet-Wheat e.g. KSSC and
Rice: PS 4, 5, PB1, PRH 10 NFSM
Sugarcane-Ratoon- No change required
Maize: Kanchan, Sweta, Navin, • Adequate supply
Wheat
Surya of
Pearl millet (Fodder): Wcc-75, electricity/diesel
Raj-171, Pusa-23, Pusa-322 should be
• Light irrigation with tube ensured by the
well water Govt. agencies.
• Follow alternate wetting and
drying schedule of irrigation
in rice
• Alternate Furrow irrigation
• Mulching in sugarcane
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system crop/cropping system Implementation
Limited Up land sandy loam Rice (Basmati)-Wheat No change • Light irrigation with tube well • Adequate
release of soils Sorghum (Fodder)/ Maize- No change water at critical stages only supply of
water in canals e.g CRI, Tillering electricity/
Potato/ Wheat
due to low &.Flowering stage diesel should
rainfall Sugarcane +cucurbits –Ratoon- No change • Follow alternate wetting and be ensured by
11
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system crop/cropping system Implementation
Wheat drying schedule of irrigation the Govt.
in rice agencies.
• Alternate Furrow irrigation
• Mulching in sugarcane/ maize
Low land clay loam Rice-wheat No change • Light irrigation with tube well • Supply of inter
soils Sorghum Fodder-Wheat No change water at critical stages only cultural
e.g CRI, Tillering implements
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change
&.Flowering stage through RKV
• Follow alternate wetting and • Adequate supply
drying schedule of irrigation of
in rice electricity/diesel
• Alternate Furrow irrigation should be
• Mulching in sugarcane ensured by the
Govt. agencies.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Non release of Up land tube well Basmati rice Maize/Arabic Rice • Limited irrigation • Seed through
water in canals irrigated canal sandy Sorghum/ Maize Pearl millet • Alternate Furrow KSSC and
under delayed loam soil /Pigeonpea/Blackgram irrigation NFSM
onset of Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane • Drip irrigation • Supply of inter
monsoon in • Mulching cultural
catchment implements
through RKVY
•
Low land tube well Rice Pearl • Limited irrigation • Seed through
irrigated canal clay millet/Blackgram/Greengram • Alternate Furrow KSSC and
loam soil Sorghum Fodder Pearl millet/Sorghum Fodder irrigation NFSM
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane • Drip irrigation • Harvesting and
• Mulching threshing
• Alternate furrow implements
irrigation through RKVY
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
12
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Lack of 1) Farming situation: Cropping system 1: NA NA NA
inflows into
tanks due to
insufficient
/delayed onset
of monsoon
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic Remarks on
situation system system measures Implementation
Insufficient Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Arabic Rice • Limited irrigation • Seed through KSSC
groundwater irrigated canal sandy /Vegetables (Tomato, Brinjal, • Alternate Furrow and NFSM
recharge due loam soil cucrbits etc) irrigation • Harvesting and
to low rainfall Sorghum/Maize Pearl millet • Drip irrigation threshing
/Pigeonpea/Blackgram • Mulching implements through
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane RKVY
Lowland tube well Rice Pearl • Limited irrigation • Seed through KSSC
irrigated canal clay millet/Blackgram/Greengram • Alternate Furrow and NFSM
loam soil Sorghum Fodder Pearl millet/Sorghum Fodder irrigation • Micro/drip/sprinkler
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane • Drip irrigation irrigation under govt.
• Mulching schemes
• Alternate furrow • Supply of inter
irrigation cultural implements
through RKVY
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short span Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
leading to water logging
Maize + Blackgram /Greengram /cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
maturity stage
Sugarcane +Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at
physiological maturity stage and Shift to safer place
Picking of cucurbits crop.
13
Blackgram or Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Safe storage against storage
Drain out & Harvesting at
physiological maturity stage. pest and disease
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking of vegetables at physiological Shift to safer place
maturity stage
Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at
physiological maturity stage and picking Shift to safer place
of cucurbits crop.
Brinjal Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place
Picking at physiological maturity stage
Tomato Provide drainage Shift to safer place
Provide drainage Picking at physiological maturity stage
Mango - -
- Spray of 2% urea+fungicide
Muskmelon - - Spray of 2% urea+fungicide -
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in a
short span
Sugarcane • Earthing Provide drainage
Drain out &Harvesting at physiological
• Tying Use Wind breaks maturity stage Shift to safer place
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks
Maize/Sorghum Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at physiological
Provide drainage Use Wind breaks maturity stage
Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Blackgram/ Greengram Provide drainage Drain out& Harvesting at physiological
Provide drainage Use Wind breaks maturity stage
Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Rice basmati Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at physiological
Provide drainage Use Wind breaks maturity stage
Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Pigeonpea • Provide drainage Provide drainage
Drain out & Harvesting at
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks physiological maturity stage Shift to safer place
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks
Horticulture
Okra • Provide drainage Provide drainage
Drain out & Harvesting at
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks physiological maturity stage
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Brinjal • Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at physio-
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks logical maturity stage
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Tomato • Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at physio- Shift to safer place
14
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks logical maturity stage
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks
Cauliflower • Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at physio-
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks logical maturity stage
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Cucurbits • Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out & Harvesting at physio-
• Sowing on raised bed Use Wind breaks logical maturity stage
• Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Shift to safer place
Mango Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks -
Muskmelon Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks Use Wind breaks -
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to
unseasonal rains
Rice basmati Need based plant Need based plant Do not use Hazardous pesticide at
Sugarcane protection IPDM for protection IPDM for maturity stage Shift to safer place
Rice/pluses Rice/pluses
Sorghum fodder
Blackgram/ Greengram
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra Need based plant Need based plant
Do not use Hazardous pesticide at
protection IPDM for protection IPDM for Shift to safer place
Brinjal maturity stage
Rice/pluses Rice/pluses
Tomato
Cucurbits
Cauliflower
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation
Rice basmati • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Direct sowing of rice
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Sugarcane • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
15
•
Sorghum fodder • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
•
Blackgram Greengram • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
•
Pigeonpea • Direct sowing • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Continuous submergence
for more than 2 days
Rice • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Direct sowing of rice
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Mango • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
• Re transplanting
Sea water intrusion3 NA NA NA NA
16
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone/Fog
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measure
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice basmati • Re sowing of nursery • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased Light and frequent
• Light and frequent irrigation decreased irrigation
during night
Sugarcane • Mulching • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased Light and frequent
decreased irrigation
Sorghum fodder • Re sowing • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be decreased Make silage
decreased
Blackgram /Greengram • Re sowing • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
• Mulching
Pigeonpea • Re sowing • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
• Mulching
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting of fruits
• Re transplanting
• Mulching of nursery beds
• Light irrigation during night
Mango • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water -
Muskmelon • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water -
Cold wave
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation
Sugarcane • Mulching • Light irrigation for survival -- • Harvesting of cane
Horticulture
Tomato Grow some inter crop • Light Sprinkler irrigation -- • Harvesting of fruits
17
Pea Grow some inter crop • Light Sprinkler irrigation -- • Harvesting of fruits
Potato Grow some inter crop • Light Sprinkler irrigation -- • Harvesting
Frost
Sugarcane • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Harvesting of cane
Pigeonpea • Grow as inter crop • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light irrigation for survival Smoke at night
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Horticulture
Potato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Tomato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • De halming
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Pea • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Mango • Irrigation &Smoking during night • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night
night
Muskmelon • Irrigation &Smoking during night • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night
night
Horticulture
All the Vegetable crops Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
• Use anti hail net • Use anti hail net • Use anti hail net • Harvest the damaged
• Spray of fungicide with 2% • Spray of fungicide with • Spray of fungicide with 2% urea fruits
urea solution 2% urea solution solution • Spray of fungicide
with 2% urea
All the Fruit crops solution
Fog
18
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
Drought
• Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
• Fodder crop Insurance trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for small • Cultivation of fast growing green
• Making of feed blocks ruminant. fodder crops.
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, feed blocks • Development of drought
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, Subabul), & mixture etc. resistance fodder.
Feed and fodder specially on bunds and wasteland • Migration of herd /flock to other places. • Increase the no. of Fodder Banks
availability • Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder crops • Establishment of communication and linkage for future use.
in irrigated area with other state agencies.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned
deptt.
• Seed production and development of drought
resistant crops and their varieties of fodder crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler irrigation
system.
• Training to the farmers and extension functionaries
for production and long term storage of feed and
fodder.
• Recharge of well/ Tanks etc.
• Preserving water in the pond/tank for drinking • Using preserved water in the tanks for drinking
purpose.
• Available ground water should be used for
• Excavation of bore well/creation of tanks or ponds.
drinking on priority basis.
Drinking water • De-silting of village ponds on regular basis and
adopt water harvesting techniques through water
shed approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube well water
during lean period.
• Farmers should be encouraged to avail Livestock • Conduction mass animal health camp and
Health and disease insurance treating the effected animals. • Availing insurance benefits.
management • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Mass campaigning though different media • Followed standard Livestock
19
calamities. regarding possible outbreak of diseases and their management practices.
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and management. • Proper health care & treatment.
vaccines.
• Vaccination
Floods
• Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
• Making of feed blocks tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. • Cultivation of fast growing green
• Use of feed mixture/block hay etc fodder crops
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, Subabul), • Migration of flock /herds
specially on bunds and wasteland • Establishment of communication and linkage
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder with other state agencies
crops.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder and that
Feed and fodder
should be stored on up land.
availability
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned
deptt.
• Seed production and development of crops and their
varieties of fodder crops for water logged
conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension functionaries
for production and long term storage of feed and
fodder.
.
Drinking water • Contaminated flood water should not be used for •
• Making suitable provision for safe drinking surface drinking. Open sources of drinking water
water including excavation of bore well/hand pump (tank/well ) should be further
(India mark—II) at community level. treated with potassium per
magnate.
• Make farmers aware not to use contaminated/ flood
water for drinking purpose.
Health and disease • Live stock Insurance • Conduction mass animal health camp and treating
management
• Training to livestock owners regarding natural the effected animals.
calamities. • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Culling sick animals
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and calamities. • Availing insurance benefits.
vaccines. • Establishment of Co-ordination with other • Culling unproductive livestock
• Vaccination Agencies. • Proper disposal of corpse of
• • Use of mass media to spread expat advice dead bodies to prevent the
• . spread of contagious diseases.
Cyclone NA NA NA
20
Heat wave and
cold wave
• Repair and maintenance of
• Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins/ rags in the additional facilities
animal sheds to protect against direct entry of hot/
• Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in the animal cold waves
Shelter/environment
shed • Provide proper bedding to prevent from cold and
management
• Create adequate sources for additional supply of proper ventilation to prevent from heat.
water to protect the animals from heat waves. • Provide drinking water to animal frequently
• Establishment of modern shelter sheds. during heat wave
• As far as possible grow shade trees such as Neem, • Watch the forecast of weather department.
Pilkhan, Karanj etc near the animal sheds. • As for as possible the animal should be allowed to
• Make provision for adequate no. of fans/coolers wallow in pounds/ canals/ river or give bath once
/heaters according to the situation, if possible or twice in a day during heat waves
• Organize village level animal health camps
• Insure the animals
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners/ para-vets regarding • Consult veterinary officer immediately if any • Proper after care of animals.
management adverse symptoms are noticed
preventive measure against extreme weather • Availing insurance benefits.
conditions • Use of ITKs for food supplements
• Proper disposal of corpse of dead
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and bodies to prevent the spread of
vaccines etc. contagious diseases.
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold
s
based on forewarning wherever available
21
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages
with ongoing
Suggested contingency measures programs, if any
Before the event During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed • Making and storage of feed • Use of feed concentrates/ • Availing insurance
concentrates
ingredients • Awareness regarding traditional feed mixture/blocks etc • Increase the no. of feed banks for
future use
banks. • Establishment of communication with
• Feed requirement data should be other state agencies.
generated • Use of locally available feed recourses.
• Prepare the feed requirement data • Import the feed recourse form other
base of poultry farm. states.
• Store the feed ingredients
• Making extra facility for drinking
Drinking water • Frequent supply of drinking water
water.
• Repair & maintenance of water
resources
Health and disease
management • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of affected poultry birds • Culling of flock
medicines and vaccines.
• Availing insurance benefits
• Vaccination
• Proper disposal of corpse of dead
• Training to poultry
bodies to prevent the pared of
Growers regarding natural calamities. contagious diseases
Floods
Shortage of feed • Cleaning of feed store & repair
ingredients • Sufficient quantity of feed if any.
ingredients should be stored • Use of stored feed in balanced form • Moist feed should be dried
• Prevent the feed from moisture. &treated as per requirement
22
• Repair, maintenance and cleaning
• Make provision of ground water for • Use only Ground water obtained from of water recourse
Drinking water drinking India Mrka II or Tubewell • Sanitation of open Wells
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with
management medicines and vaccines • Migration of flock if required • Availing insurance benefits.
• Vaccination • Treatment • Culling of unproductive flock
Cyclone NA NA NA
Shortage of feed • Storage and making of feed • Establishment of communication with • Repair and maintenance of feed
ingredients concentrates other state agencies store
• Proper feed requirement data base • Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other areas
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water for • Use only Ground water obtained from • Repair and maintenance of
drinking India Mrka II or Tubewell water recourse
• Training to poultry growers regarding • Culling of flock
• Treatment of injured poultry birds.
Health and disease natural calamities. • Availing insurance benefits.
management • Veterinary preparedness with • Proper disposal of corpse of dead
medicines and vaccines.
bodies to prevent the pared of
contagious diseases.
Heat wave and cold
wave
• Making sufficient provision of shelter • Keep the birds in appropriate shelter
Shelter/environment to protect live stock from heat and
management cold waves • Provide proper bedding to prevent from • Making of modern shelter sheds
• Establishment of alternate resource c fr o o l m d a h n e d a t p roper ventilated to prevent • Increase the plantation of trees
for water supply.
• Provide drinking water to birds
• Modern shelter sheds. frequently.
• Adopted proper management practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
• Insurance • Provide proper treatment as per • Availing insurance benefits •
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with requirement • Culling of unproductive flock
management medicines and vaccines • Treatment of injured poultry • Proper disposal of corpse of dead
• Training to poultry growers bodies to prevent the pared of
regarding natural calamities contagious diseases
a based on forewarning wherever available
23
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine _ _ _
Inland
(i) Shallow water depth due to insufficient
• Adopt appropriate measures to reduce • Harvest the crop partially • Re stock
rains/inflow
water seepage or infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen • Maintain appropriate level of water if
• Regular observation to check the water • Churning of pond water possible
• Check the water quality and remove the
quality and remove the pollutants if any.
pollutants if any.
(iii) Any other _ _ _
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Ensure the Oxygen availability into
insufficient rains/inflow • Adopt appropriate measures to reduce ponds for the survival of fish • Maintain appropriate level of water in
water seepage or infiltration from ponds • Avoid any kind of water pollution ponds
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen • Check the water quality and remove the
and maintain water pH into ponds. pollutants if any.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in ponds / • Add some fresh water from other source • Add fresh water into pond for life
change in water quality like cannel etc • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen saving and to reduce salt load
into ponds. • Maintain appropriate level of water in
• Churning of pond water ponds
• Add fresh water into pond for life • Check the water quality and remove
saving and to reduce salt load the pollutants if any.
_
(iii) Any other
_ --
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged • Close supervision of flood condition
• Boats, nets etc should be taken out from • Damaged boat or nets should be repaired
24
water bodies
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _ • Repair the damaged house.
(iii) Loss of stock _ _ • Sanitation and proper disposal of corpse
(iv) Changes in water quality • Increase the height of bunds. -- --
(v) Health and diseases -- • Treatment if possible --
B. Aquaculture
• Repair the bunds to prevent the • Repair the damaged bunds
inflow of water • Avoid inflow of flood water from • Check water quality
(i) Inundation with flood water • If inflow water is not polluted then outside. • Change the water if it is polluted
place the net at inlet and outlet
• If inflow water is not polluted that
• Raise the height of bunds
can be permitted to flow through net
• Plan a proper drainage system at placed at inlet and outlet of pond.
farm • Fencing of net required in case of
• Plantation of soil binding plants at overflow to avoid the migration of
bund fish
• Maintain appropriate level of water in
(ii) Water contamination and changes
• Limeing @300 kg/ha
ponds
in water quality • Stop inflow of contaminated water • Check the water quality and remove
the pollutants if any.
(iii) Health and diseases • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Diagnostic measures and provide • Limeing and medication as per
• Vaccination appropriate medicines
requirement
• Use Cifex to control ulcerative
syndromes
• Marketable stock should be sold • Immediately remove the dead fishes
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
from ponds and do sanitation • After sanitation add new stock
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Dommageable infrastructures should be • Do not supplié Electric in flood éd • Repaire and service the damage
aerators, huts etc) secured area infrastructure
(vi) Any other
3. Cyclone / Tsunami NA NA NA
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
B. Aquaculture
• Maintain appropriate level of water in • Maintain appropriate level of water • Maintain appropriate level of water in
(i) Changes in pond environment (water ponds i.e. 1.75m in 2m deep ponds in ponds i.e. 1.75m in 2m deep ponds i.e. 1.75m in 2m deep ponds
25
quality) • Check the water quality and remove ponds • Check the water quality and remove
the pollutants if any • Check the water quality and the pollutants if any
remove the pollutants if any
i) Health and Disease management • Limeing@300kg/ha • Medication as per requirement • Remove the dead fishes from ponds
and add new stocks to compensate
• the production
(ii) Any other
a based on forewarning wherever available
26