State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Shambhal
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/ Ecological Zone
Agro-Ecological Sub Region(ICAR) Northern Plain, Hot Subhumib (Dry) Eco-Region (9.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) UPPER GANGETIC PLAIN REGION (V)
Agro-Climatic Zone (NARP) UP-2 Mid-western Plain Zone
List all the districts falling the NARP Zone* (^ 50% area falling in the zone)
Geographical coordinates of district headquarters Latitude Longitude Altitude(mt)
28.35N 78.37E
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ZARS/RARS/RRS/RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with address Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Rustamnagar Bilari, Moradabad,
Name and address of the nearest Agromet Field Unit(AMFU,IMD)for agro S.V.P.U.A.T Meerut
advisories in the Zone
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF (mm) Normal Rainy Normal Onset N ormal Cessation
Days (Number) (Specify week and month) (Specify week and month)
SW monsoon (June-sep) 881.5 47 3rd Week of June 4th Week of September
Post monsoon (Oct-Dec) 42.2 12
Winter (Jan-March) 77.0 13
Pre monsoon (Apr-May) 25.7 7
Annual 1026.3
1.3 Land use pattern Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
of the district area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
(Latest agricultural Misc.tree land
statistics) use crops and
groves
Area in (,000 245.3 213.9 0.1 26.6 0.4 1.7 2.9 4.4 4.5 3.8
ha)
1.4 Major Soils Area(‘000 ha) Percent(%) of total
Deep, loamy soils 91.9 43 %
Deep, silty soils 21.4 10 %
Deep, fine soils moderately saline and sodic 47.1 22 %
1.5 Agricultural land use Area(‘000 ha) Cropping intensity (%)
Net sown area 200.9 171
Area sown more than once 165.8
Gross cropped area 366.8
1.6 Irrigation Area(‘000 ha)
Net irrigation area 196.9
Gross irrigated area 267.7
Rain fed area 4.1
Sources of irrigation (Gross Irr. Number Area(’000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Area)
Canals 0.03
Tanks 0
Open wells 103.8 38.7
Bore wells (Tube wells) 161.2 60.2
Lift irrigation schemes NA
Micro-irrigation NA
Other sources 2.8 1.1
Total Irrigated Area 267.7
Pump sets
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* No of blocks- (%)area Quality of water
(Data source: State/ Central Ground Tehsils-
water Department/ Board)
Over exploited
Critical
Semi-critical
Safe
Waste water availability and use
Ground water quality
*over-exploited groundwater utilization> 100%; critical: 90-100%; semicritical:70-90%; safe:<70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & (As per latest figures 2011-12)
1.7 Major field crops cultivated Area(‘000 ha)
Kharif Rabi Summer Total
Irrigated Rain fed Total Irrigated Rain fed Total
01 Rice 37.9 0 37.9 - - - - 37.9
02 Bajra 0.003 74.8 74.8 - - - - 74.8
03 Wheat - - - 139.8 0 139.8 - 139.8
04 Rapeseed Mustard - - - 10.7 0 10.7 - 10.7
05 Sugarcane 28.3 0 28.3 - - - - 28.3
06 Potato - - - 8.7 0 8.7 - 8.7
Horticulture crops -Fruits Area (‘000 ha)
Total Irrigated Rainfed
Mango 1.408 1.408 -
Guava 0.319 0.319 -
Horticulture crops -
Vegetables
Potato - - -
Onion - - -
Pea 0.050 0.050 -
1.12 Sowing window for 5
major field crops Rice Wheat Sugarcane Toria/ Mustard Mentha
Kharif- Rainfed June-July - - - -
Kharif-Irrigated June-July - October - -
Rabi- Rainfed - November - December - September-October -
Rabi-Irrigated - November - December March-April October January-March
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Flood √
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √
Cold wave √
Frost √
Sea water intrusion √
Sheath Blight, Stemborrer, Pyrilla Loos smut, Heliothis, Rust etc white grub. √
Fog
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought situation Cropping system including variety Implementation
(delayed onset)
Delay by 2 Deep soil, Maize/ Sorghum/ Bajra/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, Azad Conservation furrow, Seed-drill under
weeks yellow color Pigeonpea utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga 2,11 Samrat Inter-cultivation, RKVY,
alluvial loam etc Sowing with multi seed Supply of seed
4th week of June soils Sorghum: CSH 14, 16, CSB 13, 15, SPB dril,l through govt.
1338 etc Wider spacing for agencies ie.
Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322 pigeonpea NFSM,
ICMH-451 RKVY
Pigeonpea: UPAS 120, ICPL 151,Pusa 33
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought situation system Implementation
(delayed onset)
Delay by 4 Deep soil, Maize/ Bajra/ Maize: Kanchan, Navin Navjyoti, Azad Conservation furrow, Seed-drill under
weeks yellow color Sesame/Blackgram utam,Surya,Meerut pili,Ganga 2,11 Samrat Inter-cultivation, RKVY,
alluvial loam etc Sowing with multi seed Supply of seed
2nd week of soils Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322 drill through govt.
July ICMH-451 agencies ie.
Sesame: Pergati, shekar, TA-78, TA-12 NFSM
Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1, Pant U-
30, 19, 35 etc
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought situation system Implementation
Delay by 6 Deep soil, Blackgram/Greengram / Blackgram: Narender Blackgram-1, Pant U- Sowing with multi
weeks yellow colored Bajra 30, 19, 35 seed drill
alluvial loam
4th week of July soils Greengram: Pant Mung bean -2, 3,
Narender mung -1, 4, SML-668, PDM-11
Bajra:Raj-171,WCC-75,Pusa 23, 322
ICMH-451
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought situation system Implementation
Delay by 8 Deep soil, Toria Toria: P.T.-30, 507, 303, Bhawani, T-9 Conservation furrow, Seed-drill under
weeks yellow colored Inter-cultivation, RKVY,
alluvial loam Sowing with multi seed Supply of seed
2nd week of soils drill through govt.
August agencies ie. NFSM
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Normal Crop / Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on Implementation
drought Farming Cropping system conservation measures
(Normal situation
onset)
Normal onset Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ 1. Thining, weeding and gap Inter cultivation, Supply of inter cultural
followed by upland Sorghum (Fodder) filling in existing crop. Conservation furrow, implements through RKVY,
15-20 days dry 2. Re sowing Thinning and weeding, Farm ponds through IWSM
spell after 3. Selection/nursery sowing Mulching programme,
sowing leading of short duration rice cultivar Pulse crop seeds supply through
to poor NFSM
germination/cr
op stand etc.
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/
lowland Sorghum (Fodder)
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/
upland Pigeonpea
Un irrigated Blackgram/ Greengram
lowland
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on Implementation
drought (long Farming system conservation measures
dry spell, situation
consecutive 2
weeks rainless
(>2.5 mm)
period)
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Thinning, weeding and gap Inter cultivation, Supply of inter cultural
At vegetative upland Sorghum (Fodder) filling in existing crop, Conservation furrow, implements through RKVY,
stage Re sowing, Thinning and weeding, Farm ponds through IWSM
Postponement of top dressing Mulching programme,
of Urea, Pulse crop seeds supply through
Life saving irrigation NFSM,
Micro/drip/sprinkler irrigation
under govt. schemes
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/
lowland Sorghum (Fodder)
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/
upland Pigeonpea
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Bajra/
lowland Til/ Pigeonpea
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
drought (long Farming moisture conservation Implementation
dry spell) situation measures
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Sorghum Thining, weeding and gap filling Conservation furrow, Farm ponds
At flowering/ upland (Fodder) in existing crop, Thinning and weeding, through IWSM
fruiting stage Life saving irrigation, Mulching, programme
Weeding and weed mulching Urea spray
Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum
lowland (Fodder)
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Pigeonpea
upland
Un irrigated Bajra/ Til
lowland
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Rabi crop Remarks on
Farming planning Implementation
situation
Terminal Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Maize/ Sorghum Life saving irrigation, Toria/mustard, Farm ponds through
drought upland (Fodder) Picking/harvesting of pods/ear, Potato, IWSM programme,
(Early Irrigated Rice/ Sugarcane/ Sorghum Harvest at physiological maturity Pea/Chickpea, Supply of seed through
withdrawal of lowland (Fodder) stage , Barseem/oat ISOPM,
monsoon) Harvest for fodder Harvesting and threshing
implements through
Un irrigated Maize/ Sorghum/ Pigeonpea
RKVY,
upland
Supply of land lazer labeler
through CLDP or RKVY
Un irrigated Pigeonpea/ Bajra/ Til
lowland
1.1.2. Drought -Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
Farming system Implementation
situation
Delayed Upland sandy Rice (Basmati)-Wheat Replace rice with maize or aerobic rice Light irrigation with tube • Seed through
release of loam soils well water, KSSC and NFSM
water in canals Use short duration varieties e.g. Follow alternate wetting and • Adequate supply of
due to low Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, PRH 10 drying schedule of irrigation electricity/
rainfall Maize: Kanchan, Sweta, Navin, Surya in rice, diesel should be
Bajra:WCC-75, Raj-171, Pusa-23, Alternate Furrow irrigation, ensured by the Govt.
Pusa-322 Mulching in sugarcane/ agencies.
maize
Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- Bajra/Greengram/ Blackgram - Potato/
Potato/ Wheat Wheat
Sugarcane +cucurbits – No change
Ratoon-Wheat
Lowland clay Rice-wheat Basmati rice –Wheat Light irrigation with tube
loam soils Use short duration varieties e.g. well water,
Rice: PS 4, 5, PB 1, PRH 10 Follow alternate wetting and
Sorghum fodder-Wheat Bajra-Wheat drying schedule of irrigation
Bajra:WCC-75, Raj-171, Pusa-23, in rice,
Pusa-322 Alternate Furrow irrigation,
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change Mulching in sugarcane
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
Farming system Implementation
situation
Limited Upland sandy Rice (Basmati)-Wheat No change Follow alternate wetting and • Adequate supply
release of loam soils Sorghum (Fodder)/Maize- No change drying schedule of irrigation of electricity/diesel
water in canals in rice, should be ensured
Potato/ Wheat
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Normal Crop/ cropping Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures Remarks on
Farming system Implementation
situation
due to low Sugarcane +cucurbits – No change Alternate Furrow irrigation, by the Govt.
rainfall Ratoon-Wheat Mulching in sugarcane/ agencies.
maize • Supply of inter
Lowland clay Rice-wheat No change Follow alternate wetting and cultural implements
loam soils Sorghum Fodder-Wheat No change drying schedule of irrigation through RKV
in rice, .
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Wheat No change
Alternate Furrow irrigation,
Mulching in sugarcane/
maize
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic Remarks on
situation Crop/cropping measures Implementation
system
Non release of Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice Limited irrigation, • Seed through KSSC
water in canals Upland tube well Sorghum/Maize Bajra /Pigeonpea/Blackgram Alternate furrow and NFSM
under delayed irrigated canal sandy irrigation, • Supply of inter cultural
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane
onset of loam soil Drip irrigation, implements through
monsoon in Mulching RKVY
catchment
Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengram Limited irrigation
irrigated canal clay Sorghum Fodder Bajra/Sorghum Fodder Alternate furrow
loam soil irrigation
Sugarcane + Sugarcane
Drip irrigation
cucurbits
Mulching
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Lack of
inflows into Not Applicable
tanks due to
insufficient
/delayed onset
of monsoon
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
situation system system Implementation
Insufficient Upland tube well Basmati rice Maize/Aerobic Rice Limited irrigation Seed through KSSC and
groundwater irrigated canal sandy /Vegetables (Tomato, Alternate furrow NFSM,
recharge due loam soil Brinjal, cucrbits etc) irrigation Harvesting and threshing
to low rainfall Sorghum/Maize Bajra Drip irrigation implements through
/Pigeonpea/Blackgram Mulching RKVY
Sugarcane +cucurbits Sugarcane
Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengra Limited irrigation,
irrigated canal clay m Alternate furrow
loam soil Sorghum Fodder Bajra/Sorghum Fodder irrigation,
Drip irrigation,
Sugarcane + cucurbits Sugarcane
Mulching
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
short span leading to water
logging
Maize + Blackgram / Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place &
Greengram /cucurbits Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
maturity stage early as possible
Sugarcane Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water and
Supply to sugar mills
harvest the lodged crop as early
/crusher as early as
as possible
possible or shift to safer
place and cover the cane
with trash materials
Blackgram or Greengram Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water,
Safe storage against
Harvesting at physiological
maturity stage. storage pest and disease
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking of vegetables at Shift to safer place &
physiological maturity stage dispose of produce as
early as possible
Cucurbits Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water & Shift to safer place &
Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
maturity stage and picking of early as possible
cucurbits crop.
Brinjal Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking at physiological maturity Shift to safer place &
stage dispose of produce as
early as possible
Tomato Provide drainage Provide drainage Picking at physiological maturity Shift to safer place &
stage dispose of produce as
early as possible
Mango - Spray of 2% urea + Carbendazim -
- 0.02% solution
Guava - Spray of 2% urea + Carbendazim
- 0.02% solution -
Heavy rainfall with high
speed winds in a short span2
Earthing up
Drain out excess water and Supply to sugar mills
Sugarcane Tying harvest the lodged crop as early /crusher as early as
as possible possible or shift to safer
place and cover the cane
with trash materials
Maize/Sorghum Provide drainage, Drain out excess water,
Use wind breaks Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage maturity stage dispose of produce as
early as possible
Blackgram/ Greengram Provide drainage, Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place &
Use wind breaks Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
Provide drainage maturity stage early as possible
Rice basmati Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place &
Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
Provide drainage maturity stage early as possible
Pigeonpea Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage, Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
Sowing on raised bed maturity stage early as possible
Horticulture
Okra Provide drainage Drain out excess water Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage, ,Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
Sowing on raised bed maturity stage early as possible
Brinjal Provide drainage Drain out excess water Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage, ,Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
Sowing on raised bed maturity stage early as possible
Tomato Provide drainage, Drain out excess water , Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage, Use wind breaks, Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
Sowing on raised bed, Stacking maturity stage, early as possible
Stacking Stacking
Cauliflower Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Shift to safer place &
Provide drainage, Harvesting at physiological dispose of produce as
Sowing on raised bed maturity stage
early as possible
Cucurbits Provide drainage Drain out excess water,
Provide drainage, Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place &
Sowing on raised bed maturity stage dispose of produce as
early as possible
Mango Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use Wind breaks -
Guava Use of NAA spray Use of NAA spray
Use Wind breaks -
Outbreak of pests and
diseases due to unseasonal
rains
Rice basmati Need based plant Shift to safer place &
Do not use strong pesticide at
protection IPDM for dispose of produce as
Sugarcane Need based plant protection
IPDM for Rice/pluses Rice/pluses maturity stage early as possible
Sorghum fodder
Blackgram/ Greengram
Pigeonpea
Horticulture
Okra Need based plant Do not use strong pesticide at Shift to safer place &
Need based plant protection
protection IPDM for dispose of produce as
Brinjal maturity stage
IPDM for Rice/pluses
Rice/pluses early as possible
Tomato
Cucurbits
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice (basmati) • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
Sugarcane • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Sorghum fodder • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Blackgram/ Greengram • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Pigeonpea • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing • Provide drainage
produce as early as possible
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Continuous submergence - - - Shift to safer place & dispose of
for more than 2 days2 produce as early as possible
Rice • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of rice produce as early as possible
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Mango • Re sowing of nursery • Provide drainage • Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Sowing of nursery on raised bed produce as early as possible
• Re transplanting
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone/Fog
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measure
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice basmati • Re sowing of nursery • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent
• Light and frequent irrigation decreased decreased irrigation
during night
Sugarcane • Mulching • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Light and frequent
decreased decreased irrigation
Sorghum fodder • Re sowing • Irrigation interval should be • Irrigation interval should be Make silage
decreased decreased
Blackgram • Re sowing • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
/Greengram • Mulching
Pigeonpea • Re sowing • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Pod picking
• Mulching
Horticulture
Okra • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Re transplanting of fruits
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Brinjal • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Re transplanting of fruits
• Mulching
• Light watering during night
Tomato • Re sowing of nursery • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Re transplanting of fruits
• Mulching of nursery beds
• Light irrigation during night
Mango • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water
Guava • Spray of water • Spray of water • Spray of water
Cold wave
Wheat Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation Light irrigation
Sugarcane - • Light irrigation for survival -- Harvesting of cane
Horticulture
Tomato • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light Sprinkler irrigation Harvesting of fruits
Pea • Light Sprinkler irrigation • Light Sprinkler irrigation Harvesting of fruits
Potato • Light Sprinkler irrigation -- Harvesting
Frost
Sugarcane • Light irrigation • Light irrigation • Light irrigation Harvesting of cane
Pigeonpea • Grow as inter crop • Light irrigation • Light irrigation Smoke at night
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Horticulture
Potato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Tomato • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival De halming
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Pea • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Light irrigation for survival • Harvesting
• Smoke at night • Smoke at night • Smoke at night
Mango • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night --
night night
Guava • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during • Irrigation &Smoking during night Harvesting
night night
Hailstorm
All the crops Re sowing Re sowing of catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
Horticulture
All the Vegetable Re sowing Re sowing of Catch crop Harvest for fodder Pre Harvesting
crops
Use anti hail net, Use anti hail net Use anti hail net, Harvest the damaged
All the Fruit crops Spray of fungicide with 2% urea Spray of fungicide with 2% Spray of fungicide with 2% urea fruits
solution urea solution solution Spray of fungicide
with 2% urea solution
Fog Not applicable
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
Drought
• Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop
• Making of feed blocks trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for small insurance
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for ruminant. • Cultivation of fast
• Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, feed growing green fodder
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass,
blocks & mixture etc. crops.
Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland
Feed and fodder • Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder • Migration of herd /flock to other places. • Development of
availability crops in irrigated area • Establishment of communication and drought resistance
fodder.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder. linkage with other state agencies.
• Increase the no. of
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and fodder Banks for future
requirement should be updated by the use.
concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of drought
resistant crops and their varieties of fodder
crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler irrigation
system.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long term
storage of feed and fodder.
• Preserving water in the pond/tank for drinking • Using preserved water in the tanks for • Recharge of well/
Drinking water Tanks etc.
purpose. drinking
• Excavation of bore well/creation of tanks or • Available ground water should be used for
ponds. drinking on priority basis.
• De-silting of village ponds on regular basis and
adopt water harvesting techniques through
water shed approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube well water
during lean period.
• Farmers should be encouraged to avail • Conduction mass animal health camp and • Availing insurance
livestock insurance treating the effected animals.
benefits.
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Mass campaigning though different media • Followed standard
management calamities. regarding possible outbreak of diseases and
Livestock management
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and their management. practices.
vaccines. • Proper health care &
• Vaccination treatment.
Floods
• Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial
• Making of feed blocks tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. • Availing crop insurance
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Use of feed mixture/block hay etc • Cultivation of fast
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, • Migration of flock /herds growing green fodder
Subabul), specially on bunds and wasteland • Establishment of communication and crops
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder linkage with other state agencies
crops.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder and that
Feed and fodder
should be stored on up land.
availability
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the
concerned deptt.
• Seed production and development of crops and
their varieties of fodder crops for water logged
conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension
functionaries for production and long term
storage of feed and fodder.
Drinking water • Making suitable provision for safe drinking • Contaminated flood water should not be • Open sources of
surface water including excavation of bore used for drinking. drinking water
well/hand pump (India mark—II) at (tank/well ) should be
community level. further treated with
• Make farmers aware not to use contaminated/ potassium per
magnate.
flood water for drinking purpose.
• Culling sick animals
• Availing insurance
Health and disease • Live stock Insurance • Conduction mass animal health camp and benefits.
management
• Training to livestock owners regarding natural treating the effected animals. • Culling unproductive
calamities. • Training to livestock owners regarding natural livestock
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and calamities. • Proper disposal of
vaccines. • Establishment of Co-ordination with other
corpse of dead
• Vaccination Agencies. bodies to prevent the
• Use of mass media to spread expat advice spread of contagious
diseases.
Cyclone Not Applicable
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environmen • Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in the • Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins/ rags in the • Repair and
t management animal shed animal sheds to protect against direct entry of maintenance of
• Create adequate sources for additional supply hot/ cold waves additional facilities
of water to protect the animals from heat • Provide proper bedding to prevent from cold
waves. and proper ventilation to prevent from heat.
• Establishment of modern shelter sheds. • Provide drinking water to animal frequently
• As far as possible grow shade trees such as during heat wave
Neem, Pilkhan, Karanj etc near the animal • Watch the forecast of weather department.
sheds. • As for as possible the animal should be
• Make provision for adequate no. of allowed to wallow in pounds/ canals/ river or
fans/coolers /heaters according to the
give bath once or twice in a day during heat
situation, if possible
waves
Health and disease • Insure the animals • Organize village level animal health camps • Proper after care of
management • Training to livestock owners/ para-vets • Consult veterinary officer immediately if any animals.
regarding preventive measure against extreme adverse symptoms are noticed • Availing insurance
weather conditions • Use of ITKs for food supplements benefits.
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and • Proper disposal of
vaccines etc. corpse of dead bodies
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold to prevent the spread of
contagious diseases.
2.5.2 Poultry
Suggested contingency measures Convergence/linkages
with ongoing
programs, if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed • Making and storage of feed • Use of feed concentrates/ • Availing insurance
ingredients concentrates mixture/blocks etc • Increase the no. of
• Awareness regarding traditional • Establishment of communication feed banks for future
feed banks.
with other state agencies.
use
• Feed requirement data should be • Use of locally available feed
generated
recourses.
• Prepare the feed requirement data • Import the feed recourse form
base of poultry farm.
other states.
• Store the feed ingredients
Drinking water • Making extra facility for drinking • Frequent supply of drinking water
water.
• Repair & maintenance of water
resources
Health and • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of affected poultry • Culling of flock
disease medicines and vaccines. birds • Availing insurance
management
• Vaccination benefits
• Training to poultry • Proper disposal of
Growers regarding natural
corpse of dead bodies
calamities.
to prevent the pared of
contagious diseases
Floods
Shortage of feed • Sufficient quantity of feed • Use of stored feed in balanced • Cleaning of feed
ingredients ingredients should be stored form store & repair if any.
• Prevent the feed from moisture. • Moist feed should be
dried &treated as per
requirement
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water • Use only Ground water obtained • Repair, maintenance
for drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell and cleaning of water
recourse
• Sanitation of open
Wells
Health and • Veterinary preparedness with • Migration of flock if required • Availing insurance
disease medicines and vaccines benefits.
management
• Vaccination • Culling of
unproductive flock
Cyclone Not Applicable
Shortage of feed • Storage and making of feed • Establishment of • Repair and
ingredients concentrates communication with other state maintenance of feed
• Proper feed requirement data base agencies store
• Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other areas
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water • Use only Ground water obtained • Repair and
for drinking from India Mrka II or Tubewell maintenance of water
recourse
Health and • Training to poultry growers • Treatment of injured poultry • Culling of flock
disease regarding natural calamities. birds. • Availing insurance
management
• Veterinary preparedness with benefits.
medicines and vaccines. • Proper disposal of
corpse of dead bodies to
prevent the pared of
contagious diseases.
Heat wave and
cold wave
Shelter/environm • Making sufficient provision of • Keep the birds in appropriate • Making of modern
ent management shelter to protect live stock from shelter shelter sheds
heat and cold waves • Provide proper bedding to • Increase the plantation
• Establishment of alternate prevent from cold and proper of trees
resource for water supply. ventilated to prevent from heat
• Modern shelter sheds. • Provide drinking water to birds
frequently.
• Adopted proper management
practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
Health and • Insurance • Provide proper treatment as per • Availing insurance
disease • Veterinary preparedness with requirement benefits
management
medicines and vaccines • Treatment of injured poultry • Culling of unproductive
• Training to poultry growers flock
regarding natural calamities • Proper disposal of
corpse of dead bodies to
prevent the pared of
contagious diseases
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine _ _ _
Inland
(i) Shallow water depth due to • Adopt appropriate measures to • Harvest the crop partially • Re stock
insufficient rains/inflow reduce water seepage or infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Regular observation to check the • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen • Maintain appropriate level of water if
water quality and remove the • Churning of pond water possible
pollutants if any. • Check the water quality and remove the
pollutants if any.
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Adopt appropriate measures to • Ensure the Oxygen availability • Maintain appropriate level of water in
insufficient rains/inflow reduce water seepage or infiltration into ponds for the survival of ponds
from ponds fish • Check the water quality and remove the
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution • Avoid any kind of water pollutants if any.
and maintain water pH pollution
• Add oxy-flow to improve
oxygen into ponds.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in • Add some fresh water from other • Add oxy-flow to improve • Add fresh water into pond for life
ponds / change in water quality source like cannel etc oxygen into ponds. saving and to reduce salt load
• Churning of pond water • Maintain appropriate level of water in
• Add fresh water into pond for ponds
life saving and to reduce salt • Check the water quality and remove
load the pollutants if any.
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged • Boats, nets etc should be taken out • Close supervision of flood • Damaged boat or nets should be
from water bodies condition repaired
• Repair the damaged house.
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _
• Sanitation and proper disposal of corpse
(iii) Loss of stock _ _
• Increase the height of bunds.
(iv) Changes in water quality -- --
• Treatment if possible
(v) Health and diseases -- --
B. Aquaculture
(i) Inundation with flood water • Repair the bunds to prevent the • Avoid inflow of flood water • Repair the damaged bunds
inflow of water from outside. • Check water quality
• If inflow water is not polluted • If inflow water is not polluted • Change the water if it is polluted
then place the net at inlet and that can be permitted to flow
outlet through net placed at inlet and
• Raise the height of bunds outlet of pond.
• Plan a proper drainage system at • Fencing of net required in case
of overflow to avoid the
farm
migration of fish
• Plantation of soil binding plants
at bund
(ii) Water contamination and • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Stop inflow of contaminated • Maintain appropriate level of water in
ponds
changes in water quality water
• Check the water quality and remove
the pollutants if any.
(iii) Health and diseases • Limeing @300 kg/ha • Diagnostic measures and provide • Limeing and medication as per
• Vaccination appropriate medicines requirement
• Use Cifex to control ulcerative
syndromes
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed, • Marketable stock should be sold • Immediately remove the dead • After sanitation add new stock
chemicals etc) fishes from ponds and do
sanitation
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Dommageable infrastructures • Do not supplié Electric in flood • Repaire and service the damage
aerators, huts etc) should be secured éd area infrastructure
3. Cyclone / Tsunami Not Applicable
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
Marine -- -- --
Inland
B. Aquaculture
(i) Changes in pond
• Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of • Maintain appropriate level of water in
water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m water in ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m ponds ie. 1.75m in 2m deep ponds
environment (water quality)
deep ponds deep ponds • Check the water quality and remove
• Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and the pollutants if any
remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any
i) Health and Disease management • Limeing@300kg/ha • Medication as per requirement • Remove the dead fishes from ponds
and add new stocks to compensate
the production