State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Santkabirnagar
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Eastern Plain, Hot Subhumid (moist) Eco-Region (13.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) Middle Gangetic Plain Region (IV)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) North Eastern Plain Zone (UP-8)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Barabanki,Ambedkarnagar,Faizabad,Sultanpur,Azamgarh,Mau,Jaunpur,Varanasi, Gazipur, Ballia,
Zone* Bhadohi
(*>50% area falling in the zone)
Geographic coordinates of district Latitude Longitude Altitude
headquarters
26o48’ N 82o46’ E 284ft
Name and address of the concerned Directorate of Research, SAU, Kumarganj, Faizabad
ZRS/ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with KVK Santkabirnagar
address
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number)
SW monsoon (June-Sep): 987.1 40 3rd week of June 1st week of October
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec): 61.1 6 - -
Winter (Jan- Feb) 42.9 5 - -
Summer (March-May) 30 9 - -
Annual 1121.1 60 - -
1
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural use Misc. land
statistics) tree
crops
and
groves
Area (‘000 ha) 174.81 121.2 4.36 28.05 0.137 2.62 5.062 1.906 8.24 3.121
1. 4 Major Soils (common names like red Area Percent (%) of total Geographical area
sandy loam deep soils (etc.,)* (‘000 ha)
Clay loam - 82.69
Sandy loam - 77.96
Sandy clay - 41.26
Diara soils - 14.64
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity(% )
Net sown area 69.9
Area sown more than once -
Gross cropped area
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area -
Gross irrigated area -
Rainfed area -
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
The data
Canals 64.01 19.28
2
Tanks 0.004
Open wells 0.133
Bore wells 17.54 174.05 47.25
Lift irrigation schemes
Micro-irrigation
Other sources (please specify)
Total Irrigated Area 368.329
Pump sets 135 36.6
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils such as high levels of arsenic,
Department /Board) fluoride, saline etc)
Over exploited
Critical
Semi- critical
Safe
Wastewater availability and use
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures) (Specify year eg., 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated Kharif Rabi
Grand
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer
total
Rice 170.01 0.353 170.364 - - - - -
Maize 819.0 0.377 819.377 - - - - -
Pigeon pea 54.5 - 54.55 - - - - -
3
Wheat - - - 145.043 0.066 145.109 - -
Chickpea - - - 0.186 0.968 1.154 - -
Lentil - - - 104.70 0.003 104.703 - -
- - - - - - - - -
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits Total Irrigated Rainfed
- - - -
Horticulture crops - Total Irrigated Rainfed
Vegetables
Potato 3978(ha) 3978 (ha) 0
Onion 0.152 0.152 0
Others 6.908 6.684 0.224
Medicinal and Total Irrigated Rainfed
Aromatic crops
- - - -
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
- - - -
Eg., industrial
pulpwood crops etc.
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Jowar 0.94 0 0.9
Bajra 0.03 0 0.03
Maize 0.42 0.05 0.37
Total fodder crop 3.652 1.245 2.407
area
Grazing land - - -
Sericulture etc - - -
Others (specify) - - -
4
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Indigenous 224450 - 306.29
Non descriptive Cattle - - -
(local low yielding)
Improved crossbred cattle (Cow & Buffalo only) 1506 - 214.08
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) - - -
Buffaloes 165564 - -
Goat 225663 - 136.0
Sheep 7560 - 0.82
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak, Horse, Monkey etc.) 17005 - 10.20
Commercial dairy farms (Number) - - -
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000) 141.295
Commercial 265
Backyard 142 -
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Fisheries Department) facilities (Ice
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized plants etc.)
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake &
Gill nets) trap nets)
- - - - - -
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
- - -
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000 tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - -
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department) - - -
Others - - -
5
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops
1.11 Name of crop Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
residue as
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
fodder
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Rice 172.90 18.50 - - - - - - -
Maize 230.50 14.37 - - - - - - -
Pigeon pea 222.80 7.64 - - - - - - -
Wheat - - 240.93 26.39 - - - - -
Pea - - 323.40 9.38 - - - - -
Lentil - - 910.00 7.25 - - - - -
Mustard - - 268.00 11.57 - - - - -
Potato - - 463.03 219.76
Major Horticultural crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Crop 1 - - - - - - - - - -
1.12 Sowing window for 5 major
field crops
Paddy Maize Wheat Lentil
(start and end of normal sowing
period)
Kharif- Rainfed 2nd week of June- 1st week of June- - -
3rd week of July 4th week of June
Kharif-Irrigated 4th week of June- 3rd week of June- - -
2nd week of August 2nd week of July
Rabi- Rainfed - - 2nd week of October - 1st week of Oct-
2nd week of November 4th week of October
Rabi-Irrigated - - 2nd week of November- -
4th week of December
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought - √ -
Flood - √ -
Cyclone - - √
Hail storm - √
6
Heat wave - √ -
Cold wave - √ -
Frost - - √
Sea water intrusion - √
Pests and disease outbreak (specify) - √ √
Others (specify) - - -
1.14 Include Digital maps of Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
9
10
Annexure II
11
Annexure III
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded .
2. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty
soils .
3. Deep, fine soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy
soils .
4. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy
soils slightly saline and slightly sodic .
5. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy
soils with moderate salinity and sodicity and moderate water
logging.
6. Deep, silty soils associated with loamy soils slightly eroded .
7. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded associated with fine
soils .
Old Alluvial plain with river left out channels/Oxbows/point
bars (1-3%slope)
8. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with
stratified loamy soils slightly eroded
Active Flood Plain (1-3% slope)
9. Deep, stratified loamy soils with but moderately flooding
10. Deep, sandy soils with moderate flooding associated with
stratified loamy soils and slight flooding .
11. Deep, stratified loamy soils, with severe flooding associated
with loamy soils with moderate flooding .
12
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system system including variety Implementation
onset)
Delay by 2 weeks Sandy clay loam Rice Rice Raise Staggered rice nursery should be • Seed-drill under
soils grown at 15 days interval in small areas RKVY
1st week of July Transplanting/Direct seeding at least two times • Supply of seed
of Medium and Short through govt.
duration varieties of Rice agencies ie.
Such as NDR-97, NDR- NFSM,RKVY
359,NDR-80,NDR-118,
Baranideep etc.
Maize Maize-Prakash, Sartaj, Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Naveen, Tarun. maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
duration varieties of Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea No change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system system including variety Implementation
onset)
13
Delay by 4 weeks Deep clay loam Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat • Direct seedling of short • Seed-drill under
soils duration varieties of Rice RKVY
3rd week of July Transplanting/Direct seeding such as NDR-97, NDR-80, • Supply of seed
of Medium and Short duration NDR-118, Saket-4 through govt.
varieties of Rice Such as agencies ie.
NDR-97, NDR-359,NDR- • Raise Staggered rice nursery NFSM,RKVY
80,NDR-118, Baranideep, should be grown at 15 days
Govind,Saket-4, Ratna,IR-36 interval in small areas at least
and Pant-12 etc. two times
• Adopt SRI system of nursery
raising
• Transplanting of Rice
(beyond 20th July) with 3-4
seedlings/hill to increasing
the plant population of 60
hills/m2, instead of 50
hills/m2.
• Pruning of over aged Rice
seedlings for better
establishment and optimum
plant stand
• Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Maize Maize-Prakash, Sartaj, Intercropping/ mixed
Naveen, Tarun. cropping of maize with long
duration varieties of
Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea No change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
14
Pigeonpea No change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system system Implementation
onset)
Clay loam soils Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat Direct seeding of rice • Seed-drill under
Delay by 6 weeks RKVY
Paddy: Short duration In case of late transplanting • Supply of seed
1st week of varieties of paddy such as of rice(beyond 20th July) through govt.
August NDR-97, NDR-80,NDR-118, planting should be dense by agencies ie.
NFSM,RKVY
Pant Dhan-12 should be increasing the number of
transplanted/direct seeding. seedlings/hill from 2 to 3 to 3
to 4.
Adopt SRI system of nursery
raising
Weeding and interculture
Foliar spraying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation in
transplanted rice
Sandy loam soils Maize Greengram/ Blackgram Intercropping/ mixed
cropping of Greengram/
Greengram: T-44, Pant mung- Blackgram/
15
1, Narendra mung-1 maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet
with long duration varieties
Blackgram : Narendra urd- of pigeonpea
1,Pant urd-25
Sorghum+green gram(2:2)
Pigeonpea Pigeonpea: Bahar Maize (Tipekhiya) in
Pigeonpea(Narendra Arhar-
1) crop in 1:1 row ratio
Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Pigeonpea+
Blackgram/Greengram (1:3)
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system system Implementation
onset)
Clay loam soils Rice-Wheat Preference should be given for Direct sowing • Seed-drill under
Delay by 8 weeks sowing of Pearlmillet and RKVY
(Specify month) Sesame In case of late transplanting • Supply of seed
of rice(beyond 20th July) through govt.
Pearlmillet: Pusa 322, planting should be dense agencies ie.
by increasing the number NFSM,RKVY
323(Hybrid) and WCC-75,
of seedlings/hill from 2 to
Raj-171(Composite)
3 to 3 to 4.
Sesame: - Type-4, Type-78,
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Type-12
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
Greengram : T-44, Pant
tolerance in nursery /
mung-1, Pant mung-2,
standing crops
Samrat, Malviya, Janpriya,
Malviya jyoti, Narendra
Life saving irrigation in
mung-1
transplanted rice
Sandy loam soils Maize Intercropping/ mixed
Blackgram : Narendra urd-
16
1,Pant urd-25, Pant urd-19, cropping of Greengram/
Uttara, Type-9 Blackgram/maize/sorghum/
Pearlmillet with long
duration varieties of
pigeonpea
Land preparation for
sowing of early rabi crops
like potato,toria,lahi and
mustard
Pigeonpea September Pigeonpea -
Varieties Bahar, PDA-11,
Pusa-9 should be done till Ist
week of September.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Soil nutrient &
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
drought (Normal Crop management moisture conservation
situation system Implementation
onset) measures
Normal onset Deep clay loam Rice After seeding of rice if there is Weeding at critical • Supply of inter
followed by 15-20 soils break of monsoon by 7 to 10 stages cultural
days dry spell after days and if seedling mortality is implements
sowing leading to Foliar praying of 2.5 kg through RKVY
observed then re-sowing with the
poor germination/ Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as • Farm ponds
same variety
crop stand etc. to increase the drought through IWSM
tolerance in nursery / programme
Gap filling/transplanting in rice
standing crops • Pulse crop seeds
supply through
Using “Sanda” method, plant
Life saving irrigation NFSM
polulation can be maintainted
with sufficient number of tillers Proper electricity
in late drought condition as to monitoring/rostering
minimize the production losses system should be
ensured in area for
regular supply of
electricity for pumping
17
of water for life saving
irrigation
Maize Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain moisture
optimum plant population
Pigeonpea Leaf mulching to
Ridge sowing
conserve the soil
moisture
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain
optimum plant population
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season
drought (long dry Soil nutrient &
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
spell, consecutive 2 Crop management moisture conservation
situation system Implementation
weeks rainless measures
(>2.5 mm) period)
At vegetative stage Deep clay loam Rice Gap filling/transplanting in rice Weeding as to conserve
soils the residual soil moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to
boost up the growth Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as
18
to increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation
from the stored water
during the rainy season.
Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering
system should be
ensured in area for
regular supply of
electricity for pumping
of water for life saving
irrigation
Maize Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2%
Blackgram/ Greengram distance between the plants. MOP to increase the
resistance to drought
Pigeonpea
Frequent interculture
Leaf mulching to
Earthing up in Pigeonpea conserve the soil
moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to
boost up the growth
Conservation furrow
Life saving irrigation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Soil nutrient &
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
drought (long dry Crop management moisture conservation
situation system Implementation
spell) measures
At flowering/ Deep clay loam Rice Foliar spraying of 2% urea to Weeding as to conserve
fruiting stage soils boost up the growth the residual soil moisture
Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil
moisture
19
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as
to increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation
from the stored water
during the rainy season.
Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering
system should be ensured
in area for regular supply
of electricity for pumping
of water for life saving
irrigation
Maize Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2%
Blackgram/ Greengram distance between the plants. MOP to increase the
resistance to drought
Pigeonpea Frequent interculture
Leaf mulching to
Earthing up in Pigeonpea conserve the soil
moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to
boost up the growth
Conservation furrow
Life saving irrigation
20
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Terminal drought
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Remarks on
(Early withdrawal Crop management Rabi Crop planning
situation system Implementation
of monsoon)
Deep clay loam Rice Alternate management of Better pulverization
soils irrigation should be ensured should be made for
for provide life saving
conservation of soil
irrigation
moisture following by
planking for sowing of
Proper electricity monitoring/ early rabi crops like
rostering system should be toria and potato etc..
ensured in area for regular
supply of electricity for
Toria variety- type-9,
pumping of water for life
type-36, PT-303, PT-30
saving irrigation
and ageti Rai should be
sown in 1st week of
September while
Bhawani variety can be
sown in 2nd week of
September.
In fallow fields to sow
Ageti rai, potato
varieties like Kufri
Ashoka, Kufri Chandra
mukhi and other
vegetable crops like
spinach,reddish
coriander etc.
Maize Harvesting of intercrop at Better pulverization
physiological maturity (Maize, should be made for
Blackgram and Greengram)
conservation of soil
moisture following by
Earthing up of Pigeonpea
planking for sowing of
Harvesting of green cobs early rabi crops like
(maize) and sell in market and toria and potato etc..
remaining portion will be used
for fodder.
Toria variety- type-9,
21
Blackgram/ Greengram Life saving irrigation to type-36, PT-303, PT-30
pigeonpea if possible. and ageti Rai should be
sown in 1st week of
September while
Bhawani variety can be
sown in 2nd week of
September.
Pigeonpea -
2.1.2 Drought - Irrigated situation
Suggested Contingency measures
Normal
Condition Major Farming Change in crop/cropping Remarks on
Crop/cropping Agronomic measures
situation system Implementation
system
Delayed release of water Deep clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Short duration rice varieties- Community nursery Breeder’s seed will
in canals due to low Lentil NDR 97, Ratna, Narendra be supplied by
rainfall 118, Narendra 97, Pant Dhan Direct seeding in small beds. BHU and NDUAT,
12, HUR 105, Induri Sambha, Faizabad.
HUR 2-1, HUR-3022 to be Use of micro-irrigation
grown under aerobic systems viz. sprinkler & sub- Seed drills RKVY
condition. surface irrigation. and supply of seeds
NFSM
Limited release of water Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Rice\ Maize \ Sorghum Community nursery,
in canals due to low soils Lentil
rainfall Grow short duration aerobic Direct seeding in small beds.
rice such as NDR 97, NDR
118, Govind, Vandana, Use of micro-irrigation
Varanideep, Susk Samrat , systems viz. sprinkler & sub-
HUR 105 surface irrigation.
Maize: Malviya hybrid
Makka-2, Naveen & Jaunpuri
Pearl millet : WCC 75, Raj
171, Pusa 23
Sorghum: CSH-16, CHS-9,
CHS-14, CSV-13 &CSV-15
should be grown on ridges for
fodder/grain purposes.
22
Non release of water in Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Shift to only aerobic rice Direct seeding in small beds.
canals under delayed soils Lentil Or Rice may be replaced by
onset of monsoon in pulses Use of micro-irrigation
catchment Greengram: Pant Mung -8, systems viz. sprinkler & sub-
PDM-11, Samrat, Jyoti, surface irrigation.
Jagriti, Janpriya, Jan Chetana
& Jan Kalyani
Blackgram: Type 9, Pant U
19, Pant U 35, Narendra Urd
1 & Azad Urd-3
Sesame :Type 4, T-12, T-13,
Shekhar, GT1, TC 25 &TC
289
Lack of inflows into Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Sorghum\ Pearl millet Conservation tillage,
tanks due to insufficient soils Lentil
/delayed onset of Sowing of Pearl millet &
monsoon Sorghum for grain purposes
at 45 cm on ridges.
Foliar application of 2%
MOP
Use of mulches (straw/dust).
Insufficient groundwater Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Rice should be replaced with Direct seeding in small beds.
recharge due to low soils Lentil pulses (green gram & black
rainfall gram), oilseeds (Sesame) in .
Kharif and wheat by
Chickpea & lentil in Rabi
season.
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short span Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity Post harvest
leading to water logging stage
Rice Provide drainage Proper bunding, drain out Harvesting at Shift to safer place
excess water physiological
maturity
23
Wheat Provide drainage Drain out excess water Harvesting at Shift to safer place
physiological
maturity
Pigeonpea Provide drainage and Make inter-row furrow to Harvesting at Shift to safer place
Practice of sowing on ridges Drain out excess water physiological
maturity
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in a - - - -
short span2
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to
unseasonal rains
Rice, Wheat, Chickpea, Pigeonpea, Pearl millet Need based plant protection Need based plant Need based plant Safe storage against
(integrated pest and disease protection (integrated pest protection stored grain pest
management) and disease management (integrated pest and and diseases
disease management
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice • Arrangement of Drainage channel • Removal of excess water Provide drainage Harvesting at physiological
• Drainage of water from the rice • Drainage of excess water • Prevent premature seed maturity
fields through drainage channel germination Shift produce to safer place
• Raise community nursery in the should be made. • Foliar spray of 5% urea Provision for buying /
village marketing of discoloured
grain at the earliest to
provide relief
Maize Provide drianage , creation of Divergent drain be made to Divergent drain be made
surface drains at appropriate collect runoff at suitable points to collect runoff at
places to avoid water logging
either in artificially created suitable points either in
Removal of silt from contour
ponds or diverting to wells. artificially created ponds
staggered trenches
or diverting to wells.
Divergent drain be made to collect
runoff at suitable points either in
artificially Created ponds or
diverting to wells.
24
Drainage of excess water through
drainage channel should be made.
Continuous submergence
for more than 2 days2
Rice • Drainage of excess water through • Just after finishing of floods, If crops fails due to water • Preference should be given
drainage channel topdressing of urea could be logging caused by excess for planting of Autumn
• Transplanting of deep water rice ensured in the field rainfall, then resowing Sugarcane in the month of
–Madhupur, Jalmagn, Jalpriya, Oct so that their grand
by end week of August
Jalnidhi, Awarodhi growth completed to the
or early maturing
maxi. Extent prior to
varieties of crops should
In low lying areas; floods.
be taken • Planting of Sugarcane on
1. Water stagnation upto 30-50 cm raised beds instead of flat
ht.- Mahsuri, Jal lahri, Swarna, Drainage of excess water bed.
Sabha mahsuri through drainage • Emphasis could be given
2. Water stagnation upto 50-100 channel should be made. for cultivation of Toria,
cm height – Chakya-69, Blackgram,
Madhukar, Jalpriya Greengram/Sunflower
If top dressing of urea is
3. >100 cm height – Jalnidhi,
not possible due to water
Jalmagna
stagnation/floods, then
4. Water logging- Awarodhi,
foliar spray of 5% urea
Madhukar
solution can be done.
Drainage of excess water through
drainage channel should be made.
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone
Suggested contingency measurer
Extreme event type
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice Provide watering • Provide light Irrigation interval should be decreased -
Light and frequent irrigation during night irrigation
• Irrigation interval
should be
decreased
25
Wheat - - Provide light irrigation Harvesting at
physiological
maturity
Pigeonpea • Mulching • Irrigation interval • Irrigation interval should be decreased -
should be
decreased
Cold wave
Wheat Provide light irrigation Provide light Provide light irrigation -
irrigation
Pigeonpea Mulching Light irrigation for Light irrigation for survival Harvesting at
survival physiological
maturity
Frost Not applicable
Hailstorm Not Applicable
Cyclone Not Applicable
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
Feed and fodder availability • Storage of straw and silage in Silo pit - -
according to population of animal
Drinking water • Maintenance and inspection of Tubewells, - -
Handpumps, Ponds,
Tanks etc.
• Vaccination of animals against FMD, HS, - -
Health and disease management
B.Q. and Dewarming
Floods
Feed and fodder availability • Increase the area of fodder • Availability of safe place • Sowing of rabi fodder crops
for the animals - Berseems, Lucerne, Oat and other rabi
crops
26
Drinking water • Crops according to popu. and their storage • Distribution of stored feed
• Drain of infected stored water and
and fodders according to the
supply of fresh water for drinking.
popu. of affected
Health and disease management • Arrangement of clean drinking water in • Provide neat & clean • Proper treatment of affected (animals
sufficient water in growth drinking water vaccination & Dewarming)
Cyclone Not applicable
Feed and fodder availability •
Drinking water
Health and disease management - - -
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environment management • Shelter house/Farm house should not face • Proper availability of shelter,
directly drinking water and feeds &
fodder as per need of the • Provide shelterbelts of good quality
animals materials
Health and disease management • Ensure the availability of drinking water and • Routine health check up by veterinary
-
as well as electrolytes doctors
s based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linka
ges with ongoing
Suggested contingency measures programs, if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed -
ingredients - - -
Drinking water • Deep tubewell provide clean drinking • Provide the drinking water • Provide the drinking water -
Health and • Vaccination against infectious diseases • Vaccination • Vaccination for infectious -
disease diseases such as- Ranikhet,
management infectious Coryza, IBD, ILT
27
Floods
Shortage of feed • Inspection of established Tubewell & • Provide the drinking water • Provide the drinking water -
ingredients other water sources
Drinking water • Vaccination against infectious diseases • Vaccination • Vaccination for infectious -
diseases such as- Ranikhet,
infectious Coryza, IBD, ILT
Health and -
disease
management - - -
Cyclone Not applicable
Shortage of feed -
ingredients - - -
Drinking water - - - -
Health and -
disease
management - - -
Heat wave and
cold wave
Shelter/environm • Arrangement of proper shelter and cooler/heater to • Maintenance of surrounds temp. and prevent the birds • Heat -
ent management maintain the proper temp. of the shelter house from direct exposure of heat/ cold waves check up
Health and • Vaccination • Vaccination • Vaccinati -
disease on
management
• Availabili
ty of neat
& clean
water
a based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
28
A. Capture
Marine
Inland
Arrange for alternative water Sell the produce at minimum
resources acceptable size to the consumer Lime Application
(i) Shallow water depth due to Stocking of Air breathing
insufficient rains/inflow
(ii) Changes in water quality
Increased water temperature
(iii) Any other Decrease dissolve oxygen
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to
Arrange for alternative water Minimum disturbance to the fish Maintain the pond properly by liming,
insufficient rains/inflow
resources i.e. minimum fishing activities manuring and fertlization
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in
ponds / change in water quality -
(iii) Any other
-
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine
Inland
Harvest the large size fish Protect the escape of fish Manage the inlet, outlet structures
along with pond land
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged
(ii) No.of houses damaged
(iii) Loss of stock
(iv) Changes in water quality
(v) Health and diseases
B. Aquaculture
(i) Inundation with flood water Make 2.5 m high bylonnet bundry on Check for outlet to remain open
the band of pond Close outlet and open inlet
(ii) Water contamination and changes Close inlet and divert water Treatment of water with Alum and
in water quality receiving channel KmnO
4
29
(iii) Health and diseases Feeding, liming, manuring and
fertilization of ponds
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, huts etc)
(vi) Any other
3. Cyclone / Tsunami
A. Capture
Marine
(i) Average compensation paid due to
loss of fishermen lives
(ii) Avg. no. of boats / nets/damaged
(iii) Avg. no. of houses damaged
Inland
B. Aquaculture
(i) Overflow / flooding of ponds Stocking of fish sped for a period
of 1-2 month
(ii) Changes in water quality (fresh Liming
water / brackish water ratio) Lime+alum Harvesting and selling fish seeds
(iii) Health and diseases Lime+alum
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed, Netting of fish+KmnO application
4
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, shelters/huts etc)
(vi) Any other
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
30
Marine
Inland
B. Aquaculture
(i) Changes in pond environment
(water quality)
(ii) Health and Disease management
31