State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Shamli
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/ Ecological Zone
Agro-Ecological Sub Region(ICAR) Northern Plain, Hot Subhumib (Dry) Eco-Region (9.1)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) UPPER GANGETIC PLAIN REGION (V)
Agro-Climatic Zone (NARP) UP-2 Mid-western Plain Zone
List all the districts falling the NARP Zone* (^ 50% area falling in the zone)
Geographical coordinates of district headquarters Latitude Longitude Altitude
26.55N 81.12E
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ZARS/RARS/RRS/RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with address Swami Kalyan Dav K.V.K. Begra M. Nagar of S.V.P.U.A.T Meerut
Name and address of the nearest Agromet Field Unit(AMFU,IMD)for agro S.V.P.U.A.T Meerut
advisories in the Zone
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF (mm) Normal Rainy Normal Onset Normal Cessation
Days (Number) (Specify week and month) (Specify week and month)
SW monsoon (June-sep) 855.9 47 4th Week of June 2nd Week of Sep 4th Week of June 2nd Week of Sep
NE monsoon (Oct-Dec) 49.4 12 3rd Week of Dec 2nd Week of Jan 3rd Week of Dec 2nd Week of Jan
Winter (Jan-March) 42.3 13
Summer (Apr-May) 16.5 7
Annual 964.0
1.3 Land use pattern Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
of the district area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
(Latest agricultural Misc.tree land
statistics) use crops and
groves
Area (000’ha) 307.0 250.9 1.4 40.7 2.4 6.9 10.2 11.5 24.1 15.6
1.4 Major Soils Area(‘000 ha) Percent(%) of total
Sandy loam soils 115.0
Loam soils 95.0
Clay loam soils 40.9
Silt loam soils -
1.5 Agricultural land use Area(‘000 ha) Cropping intensity (%)
Net sown area 194.1 153.60 %
Area sown more than once 104.
Gross cropped area 298.1
1.6 Irrigation Area(‘000 ha)
Net irrigation area 173.4
Gross irrigated area 266.1
Rain fed area 20.7
Sources of irrigation Number Area(’000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 133.7 50.3
Tanks 0.03 0.01
Open wells 0
Bore wells 132.4 49.7
Lift irrigation schemes
Micro-irrigation
Other sources 0
Total Irrigated Area 266.138
Pump sets
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* No of blocks- (%)area Quality of water
(Data source: State/ Central Ground Tehsils-
water Department/ Board)
Over exploited
Critical
Semi-critical
Safe
Waste water availability and use
Ground water quality
*over-exploited groundwater utilization> 100%; critical: 90-100%; semicritical:70-90%; safe:<70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & (As per latest figures 2013-14)
1.7 Major field crops cultivated Area(‘000 ha)
Kharif Rabi Summer Total
Irrigated Rain fed Total Irrigated Rain fed Total
Wheat 0 0 0 125.8 0.005 125.8 0 125.8
Rice 117.9 0.3 118.2 0 0 0 0.002 118.2
Pulses 0 5.0 5.0 1.5 12.6 14.1 4.4 23.5
Oilseeds 0 4.1 4.1 2.7 0.4 3.1 0.01 7.2
Millets 0 4.7 4.7 0 0 0 0 4.7
Total 117.9 14.1 132.0 129.9 13.0 142.9 4.5 279.4
1.8 Production and productivity of major crops (Average of last 5 years)
1.8 Major field crops Area(‘000 ha)
cultivated
Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity residue
(‘000 T) (KG/HA) (‘000 T) (KG/HA) (‘000 T) (KG/HA) (‘000 T) (KG/HA) as fodder
(‘000
tons)
Rice 277.004 2312 0 0 0.002 2500 277.006 2312 -
Wheat 0 0 364.637 2911 0 0 364.637 2911 -
Pulses 2.429 489 14.008 1002 2.581 561 19.282 813 -
Oilseeds 0.117 197 2.345 792 0.026 1418 2.496 697 -
Millets 2.193 934 0 0 0 0 2.193 934 -
Foodgrain 283.619 2185 469.240 2525 2.691 576 668.865 2437 -
1.8 Sowing window for 5 major Rice Wheat Maize Black gram Green gram
field crops
Kharif –Rainfed - - June June-July June-July
Kharif - Irrigated June- July - June June-July June-July
Rabi –Rainfed - Nov-Dec - - -
Rabi - Irrigated - Nov-Dec - - -
1.9 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? Regular Occasional None
Drought √
Flood √
Cyclone √
Hail storm √
Heat wave √
Cold wave √
Frost √
Sea water intrusion √
Sheath Blight, Stemborrer , Pyrilla loos smut, Heliothis, Rust etc white √
grub.
1.14 Include Digital maps of the district for Location map of district with in State as Annexure I Enclosed : Yes
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed : No
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed : No
Annexure I
Location map of Shamli district
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested contingency measures
Early season drought Major farming Normal crop/ Cropping Change in crops/ Cropping Agronomic measures Remark on
(delayed onset) situation systems systems implementation
Delay by 2 weeks - Bajra, jowar Bajra- ICTP-8203, JBV-2, Pusa- Short duration varieties -
4th week of June 23 and 86M86 Conservation of soil
Jowar-CSV-13, SCV-15 moisture, Use multi
crop planter
Delay by 4 weeks - Til, Urd, Moong Til- Pragti, Shekhar, T-78, Conservation of soil -
4nd week of July Urd- Pant-40, Pant-35, IPM94-1 moisture, Mixed
KU-91 farming, Use multi crop
Moong- PDM-139,K-851, planter
Vaibhav
Delay by 6 weeks - Til, Urd, Moong Til- Pragti, Shekhar, T-78, Mixed farming, Use -
4th week of July Urd- Pant-40, Pant-35, IPM94-1 multi crop planter
KU-91
Moong- PDM-139,K-851
Delay by 8weeks - Toria Toria- PT-303, PT-507, Bhawani, Use multi crop planter -
2nd week of August T-9
Condition Suggested contingency measures
Early season drought Major farming Normal crop/ Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remark on
(Normal onset) situation Cropping systems conservation measures implementation
Normal onset followed by Irrigated upland Rice, Black gram, 1-Thining , weeding Inter cultivation, -
15-20 days dry spell after Green gram and gap filing in Conservation of soil
sowing leading to poor Irrigated lowland Rice jowar, Bajra existing crop. moisture, Thining weeding
germination/ op stand Pigeon Pea 2- Re sowing Mulching.
Un Irrigated upland Til, Urd, Moong, 3- Selection/nursery
Piogeon pea sowing of short
Un Irrigated lowland Til, Urd, Moong duration rice
Piogeon pea
Mid season drought (Long dry spell consecutive 2 weeks rainless( .2.5mm period)
At vegetative stage Irrigated upland Rice, Black gram, 1-Thining , weeding Inter cultivation, -
Green gram and gap filing in Conservation of soil
Irrigated lowland Rice jowar, Bajra existing crop. moisture, Thining weeding
Pigeon Pea 2- Re sowing Mulching.
Un Irrigated upland Til, Urd, Moong, 3- Selection/nursery
Piogeon pea sowing of short
Un Irrigated lowland Til, Urd, Moong duration rice
Piogeon pea
At flowering / Irrigated upland Rice, Black gram, 1-Thining , weeding Thining weeding Mulching. -
fruiting stage Green gram and in existing crop. Urea spray Conservation of
Irrigated lowland Rice jowar, Bajra 2- Life saving soil moisture
Pigeon Pea irrigation.
Un Irrigated upland Til, Urd, Moong,
Piogeon pea
Un Irrigated lowland Til, Urd, Moong
Piogeon pea
Normal crop/ Crop management Rabi Crop planning Remark on
Cropping systems implementation
Thermal drought Irrigated upland Rice, Black gram, Life saving Toria/Mustard, Pea, -
(Early withdrawal of Green gram irrigation, Picking/
monsoon) Irrigated lowland Rice jowar, Bajra harvesting of
Pigeon Pea pods/ear, Harvest at
Un Irrigated upland Til, Urd, Moong, physiological
Piogeon pea maturity stage,
Un Irrigated lowland Til, Urd, Moong
Piogeon pea
2.1.2 Drought –Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested contingency measures
Early season drought Major farming Normal crop/ Cropping Change in crops/ Cropping Agronomic measures Remark on
(delayed onset) situation systems systems implementation
Delayed release of Upland soils Rice-Wheat Short duration Rice Light irrigation with tube Adequate supply of
water in canals due to Varieties-Wheat well water, Follow electricity/ diesel
low rainfall Jowar/Bajra - Pea No change alternate wetting and should be ensured by
Black gram/green gram- No change drying schedule of Govt. Agencies.
irrigation in rice, Use solar power
Alternate Furrow Irrigation .
irrigation,
Lowland soils Rice-Wheat Short duration Rice Light irrigation with tube
Varieties-Wheat well water, Follow
Kharif pulses-Wheat No change alternate wetting and
Kharif pulses- Rabi No change drying schedule of
Pulses irrigation in rice,
Alternate Furrow
irrigation,
Limited release of Upland soils Rice-Wheat Short duration Rice Light irrigation with tube Adequate supply of
water in canals due to Varieties-Wheat well water, Follow electricity/ diesel
low rainfall Kharif pulses-Wheat No change alternate wetting and should be ensured by
Kharif pulses- Rabi No change drying schedule of Govt. Agencies.
Pulses irrigation in rice, Use solar power
Alternate Furrow Irrigation .
irrigation,
Lowland soils Rice-Wheat Short duration Rice Light irrigation with tube
Varieties-Wheat well water, Follow
Kharif pulses-Wheat No change alternate wetting and
Kharif pulses- Rabi No change drying schedule of
Pulses irrigation in rice,
Alternate Furrow
irrigation,
Non release of water in Upland tube well Rice Replace rice with - -
canals under delayed irrigated canal Sandy Jowar/Bajra
onset of monsoon in Loam soils Jowar/Bajra No change - -
catchment Urd/Moong/Pigeon Pea- No change - -
Wheat
Lowland tube well Rice Bajra/Blackgram/Greengram - -
irrigated canal clay Jowar/Bajra No change - -
loam soils Urd/Moong/Pigeon Pea- No change - -
Wheat
2.2 Unusual rains –(Untimely, unseasonal etc)
Condition Suggested contingency measures
Continuous high rainfall in a short Vegetative Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
span leading to water logging stage
Til /Black gram/ Green gram/Pigeon Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Shift to safer place& dispose of
Pea physiological maturity stage produce as early as possible
Black gram/ Green gram/ Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Safe storage against storage pest
physiological maturity stage and disease
Condition Suggested contingency measures
Heavy rainfall with high speed Vegetative Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
winds in a short span stage
Til /Black gram/ Green gram/Pigeon Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Shift to safer place& dispose of
Pea physiological maturity stage produce as early as possible
Black gram/ Green gram/ Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Safe storage against storage pest
physiological maturity stage and disease
Rice Basmati Provide drainage Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Safe storage against storage pest
physiological maturity stage and disease
Pigeon pea Provide Provide drainage Drain out excess water, Harvesting at Safe storage against storage pest
drainage, physiological maturity stage and disease
Sowing on
raised bed
Condition Suggested contingency measures
Outbreak of pests and diseases due Vegetative Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
to unseasonal rains stage
Rice Basmati Need based Need based plant Do not use strong pesticides at maturity Shift to safer place & dispose of
plant protection protection IPDM stage produce as early as possible
Pigeon pea
IPDM for Rice/ for Rice/ Pulses
Black gram/ Green gram/ Pulses
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measures
Transient water logging/ partial Seedling/Nursery Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
inundation stage
Rice (Basmati) • Re sowing of nursery Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
• Direct sowing of produce as early as possible
rice
• Sowing of nursery
on raised bed
Black gram/ Green gram/ Direct sowing Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Pigeon pea Direct sowing Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
Sorghum Direct sowing Provide drainage Provide drainage Shift to safer place & dispose of
produce as early as possible
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
Drought
• Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial • Availing crop insurance
• Making of feed blocks trees/shrubs/fodder bank reserves for small • Cultivation of fast growing green
Feed and fodder • Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for ruminant. fodder crops.
availability
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, Subabul), • Utilizing stored fodder as silage, hay, feed blocks • Development of drought
specially on bunds and wasteland & mixture etc. resistance fodder.
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder crops • Migration of herd /flock to other places. • Increase the no. of Fodder Banks
in irrigated area • Establishment of communication and linkage for future use.
• Making silage or hay of excess fodder. with other state agencies.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned
deptt.
• Seed production and development of drought
resistant crops and their varieties of fodder crops.
• Encourage farmers to adopt sprinkler irrigation
system.
• Training to the farmers and extension functionaries
for production and long term storage of feed and
fodder.
• Recharge of well/ Tanks etc.
• Preserving water in the pond/tank for drinking • Using preserved water in the tanks for drinking
purpose.
• Available ground water should be used for
• Excavation of bore well/creation of tanks or ponds.
drinking on priority basis.
Drinking water • De-silting of village ponds on regular basis and
adopt water harvesting techniques through water
shed approach.
• Filling of the ponds with canal/tube well water
during lean period.
• Farmers should be encouraged to avail Livestock • Conduction mass animal health camp and
• Availing insurance benefits.
insurance treating the effected animals.
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Mass campaigning though different media • Followed standard Livestock
management calamities. regarding possible outbreak of diseases and their management practices.
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and management. • Proper health care & treatment.
vaccines.
• Vaccination
Floods
• Fodder crop Insurance • Utilizing fodder from perennial
• Making of feed blocks tress/shrubs/fodder bank reserves. • Availing crop insurance
• Encourage farmers to allocate some lands for • Use of feed mixture/block hay etc • Cultivation of fast growing green
cultivating perennial fodder (Napier grass, Subabul), • Migration of flock /herds fodder crops
specially on bunds and wasteland • Establishment of communication and linkage
• Establishing fodder banks, encouraging fodder with other state agencies
crops.
Feed and fodder
availability • Making silage or hay of excess fodder and that
should be stored on up land.
• Statistics regarding feed/fodder availability and
requirement should be updated by the concerned
deptt.
• Seed production and development of crops and their
varieties of fodder crops for water logged
conditions.
• Training to the farmers and extension functionaries
for production and long term storage of feed and
fodder.
Drinking water • Contaminated flood water should not be used for • Open sources of drinking water
drinking. (tank/well ) should be further
• Making suitable provision for safe drinking surface treated with potassium per
water including excavation of bore well/hand pump magnate.
(India mark—II) at community level.
• Make farmers aware not to use contaminated/ flood
water for drinking purpose.
Health and disease • Live stock Insurance • Conduction mass animal health camp and treating
management
• Training to livestock owners regarding natural the effected animals.
calamities. • Training to livestock owners regarding natural • Culling sick animals
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and calamities. • Availing insurance benefits.
vaccines. • Establishment of Co-ordination with other • Culling unproductive livestock
• Vaccination Agencies. • Proper disposal of corpse of
• • Use of mass media to spread expat advice dead bodies to prevent the
• . spread of contagious diseases.
Cyclone N.A N.A N.A
N.A
Heat wave and
cold wave
• Repair and maintenance of
• Avoid use of GI sheet for roofing in the animal • Provide the thatches/ tarpaulins/ rags in the additional facilities
shed
animal sheds to protect against direct entry of hot/
• Create adequate sources for additional supply of cold waves
Shelter/environment water to protect the animals from heat waves. • Provide proper bedding to prevent from cold and
management
• Establishment of modern shelter sheds. proper ventilation to prevent from heat.
• As far as possible grow shade trees such as Neem, • Provide drinking water to animal frequently
Pilkhan, Karanj etc near the animal sheds. during heat wave
• Make provision for adequate no. of fans/coolers • Watch the forecast of weather department.
/heaters according to the situation, if possible • As for as possible the animal should be allowed to
wallow in pounds/ canals/ river or give bath once
or twice in a day during heat waves
• Insure the animals
Health and disease • Training to livestock owners/ para-vets regarding • Organize village level animal health camps • Proper after care of animals.
management preventive measure against extreme weather • Consult veterinary officer immediately if any • Availing insurance benefits.
conditions
adverse symptoms are noticed
• Proper disposal of corpse of dead
• Veterinary preparedness with medicines and • Use of ITKs for food supplements bodies to prevent the spread of
vaccines etc. contagious diseases.
• Vaccination against FMD &Cold
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages
with ongoing
Suggested contingency measures programs, if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed • Making and storage of feed • Use of feed concentrates/ • Availing insurance
concentrates
ingredients • Awareness regarding traditional feed mixture/blocks etc • Increase the no. of feed banks for
future use
banks. • Establishment of communication with
• Feed requirement data should be other state agencies.
generated • Use of locally available feed recourses.
• Prepare the feed requirement data • Import the feed recourse form other
base of poultry farm. states.
• Store the feed ingredients
• Making extra facility for drinking
Drinking water • Frequent supply of drinking water
water.
• Repair & maintenance of water
resources
Health and disease
management • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of affected poultry birds • Culling of flock
medicines and vaccines.
• Availing insurance benefits
• Vaccination
• Proper disposal of corpse of dead
• Training to poultry
bodies to prevent the pared of
Growers regarding natural calamities. contagious diseases
Floods
Shortage of feed • Sufficient quantity of • Use of stored feed in balanced • Cleaning of feed store & repair
ingredients feed ingredients should be stored form
if any.
• Prevent the feed from moisture. • Moist feed should be dried
&treated as per requirement
• Repair, maintenance and cleaning
• Make provision of ground water for • Use only Ground water obtained from of water recourse
Drinking water drinking India Mrka II or Tubewell • Sanitation of open Wells
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with
management medicines and vaccines • Migration of flock if required • Availing insurance benefits.
• Vaccination • Treatment • Culling of unproductive flock
Cyclone NA NA NA
Shortage of feed • Storage and making of feed • Establishment of communication with • Repair and maintenance of feed
ingredients concentrates other state agencies store
• Proper feed requirement data base • Use of stored feed ingredient
• Import of feed from other areas
Drinking water • Make provision of ground water for • Use only Ground water obtained from • Repair and maintenance of
drinking India Mrka II or Tubewell water recourse
• Training to poultry growers regarding
Health and disease natural calamities. • Culling of flock
management • Veterinary preparedness with • Treatment of injured poultry birds. • Availing insurance benefits.
medicines and vaccines.
• Proper disposal of corpse of dead
bodies to prevent the pared of
contagious diseases.
Heat wave and cold
wave
Shelter/environment
management • Making sufficient provision of shelter • Keep the birds in appropriate shelter • Making of modern shelter sheds
t c o o ld p r w ot a e v c e t s live stock from heat and • Provide proper bedding to prevent from • Increase the plantation of trees
cold and proper ventilated to prevent
• Establishment of alternate resource from heat
for water supply. • Provide drinking water to birds
• Modern shelter sheds. frequently.
• Adopted proper management practices.
• Watch the fore cast of weather
department.
• Insurance • Provide proper treatment as per • Availing insurance benefits •
requirement
Health and disease • Veterinary preparedness with • Culling of unproductive flock
management • Treatment of injured poultry
medicines and vaccines • Proper disposal of corpse of dead
• Training to poultry growers bodies to prevent the pared of
regarding natural calamities contagious diseases
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the event During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
(i) Shallow water depth due to insufficient
• Adopt appropriate measures to reduce • Harvest the crop partially • Re stock
rains/inflow
water seepage or infiltration
(ii) Changes in water quality • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen
• Maintain appropriate level of
• Regular observation to check the water • Churning of pond water water if possible
quality and remove the pollutants if any. • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any.
(iii) Any other _ _ _
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to • Ensure the Oxygen availability into
insufficient rains/inflow • Adopt appropriate measures to reduce ponds for the survival of fish • Maintain appropriate level of
water seepage or infiltration from ponds • Avoid any kind of water pollution water in ponds
• Avoid any kinds of water pollution • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen • Check the water quality and
and maintain water pH into ponds. remove the pollutants if any.
• Churning of pond water
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in ponds / • Add some fresh water from other source • Add oxy-flow to improve oxygen • Add fresh water into pond for
change in water quality like cannel etc into ponds. life saving and to reduce salt
• Churning of pond water load
• Add fresh water into pond for life • Maintain appropriate level of
saving and to reduce salt load water in ponds
• Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any.
_
(iii) Any other
_ --
2) Floods
A. Capture
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged • Boats, nets etc should be taken out from • Close supervision of flood condition • Damaged boat or nets should be
water bodies repaired
(ii) No. of houses damaged _ _ • Repair the damaged house.
• Sanitation and proper disposal of
(iii) Loss of stock _ _
corpse
(iv) Changes in water quality • Increase the hight of bunds. -- --
(v) Health and diseases -- • Treatment if possible --
B. Aquaculture
• Repair the damaged bunds
• Repair the bunds to prevent the • Check water quality
inflow of water
• Avoid inflow of flood water from • Change the water if it is
(i) Inundation with flood water
• If inflow water is not polluted then
outside. polluted
place the net at inlet and outlet
• If inflow water is not polluted that
• Raise the height of bunds
can be permitted to flow through net
• Plan a proper drainage system at placed at inlet and outlet of pond.
farm • Fencing of net required in case of
• Plantation of soil binding plants at overflow to avoid the migration of
bund fish
• Maintain appropriate level of
(ii) Water contamination and changes
• Limeing @300 kg/ha
water in ponds
in water quality • Stop inflow of contaminated water • Check the water quality and
remove the pollutants if any.
• Diagnostic measures and provide • Limeing and medication as per
(iii) Health and diseases • Limeing @300 kg/ha appropriate medicines requirement
• Vaccination • Use Cifex to control ulcerative
syndromes
• Marketable stock should be sold • Immediately remove the dead fishes
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
from ponds and do sanitation • After sanitation add new stock
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps, • Damageable infrastructures should be • Do not supplié Electric in flood éd • Repaire and service the damage
aerators, huts etc) secured area infrastructure
(vi) Any other
3. Cyclone / Tsunami NA NA NA
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
B. Aquaculture
• Maintain appropriate level of water • Maintain appropriate level of
• Maintain appropriate level of water in in ponds i.e. 1.75m in 2m deep water in ponds i.e. 1.75m in
(i) Changes in pond environment (water ponds i.e. 1.75m in 2m deep ponds ponds 2m deep ponds
quality) • Check the water quality and remove • Check the water quality and • Check the water quality and
the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any remove the pollutants if any
• Remove the dead fishes from
i) Health and Disease management • Limeing@300kg/ha • Medication as per requirement
ponds and add new stocks to
compensate
• the production