State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Shiddarthnagar
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Eastern Plain, Hot Subhumid (moist) Eco-Region (13.2)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) Middle Gangetic Plain Region (IV)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) North Eastern Plain Zone (UP-8)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Barabanki,Ambedkarnagar,Faizabad,Sultanpur,Azamgarh,Mau,Jaunpur,Varanasi, Gazipur, Ballia,
Zone* (*>50% area falling in the zone) Bhadohi
Geographic coordinates of district Latitude Longitude Altitude
headquarters
26’o48’ N 82o46’ E 284ft
Name and address of the concerned Directorate of Research, SAU, Kumarganj,Faizabad
ZRS/ZARS/ RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with KVK Shiddarthnagar
address
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number) ( specify week and (specify week and
month) month)
SW monsoon (June-Sep): 1041.2 42 3rd week of June 1st week of October
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec): 119.5 7 - -
Winter (Jan- Feb) 97.1 2 - -
Summer (March-May) 152.5 12 - -
Annual 1410.3 63 - -
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural use Misc. land
statistics) tree
crops
and
groves
Area (‘000 ha) 298.293 206.768 4.093 - - - - 3.657 - -
1. 4 Major Soils (common names like red Area Percent (%) of total Geographical area
sandy loam deep soils (etc.,)* (‘000 ha)
Clay loam 926.09 -
Sandy loam 873.16 -
Sandy clay 462.11 -
Diara 16392 -
Others (specify): - -
*
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity(% )
Net sown area -
Area sown more than once - 172.41
Gross cropped area 206.768
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 252.204
Gross irrigated area 368.329
Rainfed area
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 64.01 19.28
2
Tanks 0.004
Open wells 0.133
Bore wells 17.54 174.05 47.25
Lift irrigation schemes
Micro-irrigation
Other sources (please specify)
Total Irrigated Area 368.329
Pump sets 135 36.6
No. of Tractors
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils such as high levels of arsenic, fluoride,
Department /Board) saline etc)
Over exploited
Critical
Semi- critical
Safe
Wastewater availability and use
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Area under major field crops & horticulture (as per latest figures) (Specify year eg., 2008-09)
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated Kharif Rabi
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer Grand total
Rice 170.011 0.353 170.364 - - - - -
3
Maize 819.00 0.377 819.377 - - - - -
Pigeon pea 54.55 - 54.55 - - - - -
Wheat - - - 145.043 0.066 145.109 - -
Chickpea - - - 0.186 0.968 1.154 - -
Lentil - - - 104.70 0.003 104.703 - -
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits Total Irrigated Rainfed
- - - -
Horticulture crops - Total Irrigated Rainfed
Vegetables
Potato 3978 3978 0
Onion 0.152 0.152 0
Others 6.908 6.684 0.224
Medicinal and Aromatic Total Irrigated Rainfed
crops
- - - -
Plantation crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
- - - -
Eg., industrial pulpwood
crops etc.
Fodder crops Total Irrigated Rainfed
Jowar 0.947 0 0.947
Bajra 0.032 0 0.032
Maize 0.427 0.050 0.377
- - - -
Total fodder crop area 3.652 1.245 2.407
Grazing land - - -
Sericulture etc - - -
4
Others (specify) - - -
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Indigenous - 306.29
Non descriptive Cattle - -
(local low yielding)
Improved crossbred cattle (Cow & Buffalo only) - 214.08
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding) - -
Buffaloes - -
Goat - 136.0
Sheep - 0.82
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak, Horse, Monkey etc.) - 10.20
Commercial dairy farms (Number) - - -
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000)
Commercial 265 141.295
Backyard 142 -
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Fisheries Department) facilities (Ice
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized plants etc.)
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake &
Gill nets) trap nets)
- - - - - -
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
- - -
B. Culture
5
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000 tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) - - -
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department) - - -
Others - - -
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops
1.11 Name of crop Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
residue as
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
fodder
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Rice 503.572 29.62 - - - - - - -
Jowar 0.849 89.70 - - - - - - -
Maize 819.0 17.09 - - - - - - -
Pigeon pea 3.83 1132 - - - - - - -
Wheat - - 145.043 27.22 - - - - -
Chick pea - - 54.55 12.90 - - - - -
Lentil - - 10.47 9.89 - - - - -
Major Horticultural crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Crop 1 - - - - - - - - - -
1.12 Sowing window for 5
major field crops
Paddy Maize Pigeonpea Wheat Lentil
(start and end of
normal sowing period)
Kharif- Rainfed 2nd week of June- 2nd week of June – 1st week of July - - -
3rd week of July 4th week of June 4th week of July
Kharif-Irrigated 4th week of June- 3rd week of June – - - -
2nd week of August 3rd week of July
6
Rabi- Rainfed - - Early rabi- September - 2nd week of October- 1Oct-25Oct
October
2nd week of November
Rabi-Irrigated - - - 15Nov-31Dec. -
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought - √ -
Flood - √ -
Cyclone - - √
Hail storm - √
Heat wave - √ -
Cold wave - √ -
Frost - - √
Sea water intrusion - √ -
Pests and disease outbreak (specify) - √ √
Others (specify) - - -
1.14 Include Digital maps of Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
9
Annexure II
10
Annexure III
SOILS OF SIDDARTH NAGAR DISTRICT (U.P.)
Piedmont Plains (1-3% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded
2. Deep, fine soils and slightly eroded associated with fine loamy
soils
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
3. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded .
4. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with silty
soils .
5. Deep, fine soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy
soils .
6. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy
soils with moderate salinity and sodicity and moderate water
logging.
7. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded associated with fine soils .
Old Alluvial plain with river left out channels/Oxbows/point bars
(1-3% slope)
8. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with
stratified loamy soils slightly eroded
Recent Alluvial Plain (1-3% slope)
9. Fine soils with slight erosion, water logging
10. Deep, silty soils with moderate water logging
11. Deep, silty soils and slight flooding associated with loamy
soils and slight flooding
12. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with fine
soils and moderate flooding
Active Flood Plain (1-3% slope)
13. Deep, stratified loamy soils with but moderately flooding .
11
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Change in crop / Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system cropping system Implementation
onset) including variety
Delay by 2 weeks Deep clay loam soils Rice Rice Raise Staggered rice nursery should be
grown at 15 days interval in small areas at
1st week of July Transplanting/Direct least two times
seeding of Medium
and Short duration
varieties of Rice Such
as NDR-97, NDR-
359,NDR-80,NDR-
118, Baranideep etc.
Maize Maize-Prakash, Sartaj, Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Naveen, Tarun. maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
duration varieties of Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea Pigeonpea Sowing on raised beds,
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system system including variety Implementation
onset)
12
Delay by 4 weeks Deep clay loam soils Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat • Direct seedling of short duration varieties • Seed-drill under
of Rice such as NDR-97, NDR-80, NDR- RKVY
3rd week of July Transplanting/Direct seeding of 118, Saket-4 • Supply of seed
Medium and Short duration through govt.
varieties of Rice Such as NDR-97, • Raise Staggered rice nursery should be agencies ie.
NDR-359,NDR-80,NDR-118, grown at 15 days interval in small areas at NFSM,RKVY
Baranideep, Govind,Saket-4, least two times
Ratna,IR-36 and Pant-12 etc.
• Adopt SRI system of nursery raising
• Transplanting of Rice (beyond 20th July)
with 3-4 seedlings/hill to increasing the
plant population of 60 hills/m2, instead of
50 hills/m2.
• Pruning of over aged Rice seedlings for
better establishment and optimum plant
stand
• Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5 kg
Potash as to increase the drought
tolerance in nursery / standing crops
Maize Maize-Prakash, Sartaj, Naveen, Intercropping/ mixed cropping of maize
Tarun. with long duration varieties of Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea No change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
13
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Cropping system system including variety Implementation
onset)
Delay by 6 weeks Deep clay loam soils Rice-Wheat Rice-Wheat Direct seeding of rice • Seed-drill under
1st week of August RKVY
Paddy: Short duration varieties In case of late transplanting of • Supply of seed
of paddy such as NDR-97, rice(beyond 20th July) planting should through govt.
NDR-80,NDR-118, Pant Dhan- be dense by increasing the number of agencies ie.
NFSM,RKVY
12 should be transplanted/direct seedlings/hill from 2 to 3 to 3 to 4.
seeding.
Adopt SRI system of nursery raising
Weeding and interculture
Foliar spraying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5 kg
Potash as to increase the drought
tolerance in nursery / standing crops
Life saving irrigation in transplanted
rice
Maize Greengram/ Blackgram Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Greengram/ Blackgram/
Greengram: T-44, Pant mung-1, maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
Narendra mung-1 duration varieties of pigeonpea
Blackgram : Narendra urd- Sorghum+green gram(2:2)
1,Pant urd-25
Pigeonpea Pigeonpea: Bahar Maize (Tipekhiya) in
Pigeonpea(Narendra Arhar-1) crop in
1:1 row ratio
Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
14
Pigeonpea+ Blackgram/Greengram
(1:3)
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system system including variety Implementation
onset)
Delay by 8 weeks Deep clay loam soils Rice-Wheat Preference should be given for Direct sowing • Seed-drill under
3rd week of August sowing of Pearlmillet and Sesame RKVY
In case of late transplanting • Supply of seed
Pearlmillet: Pusa 322, of rice(beyond 20th July) through govt.
323(Hybrid) and WCC-75, Raj- planting should be dense agencies ie.
by increasing the number NFSM,RKVY
171(Composite)
of seedlings/hill from 2 to
3 to 3 to 4.
Sesame: - Type-4, Type-78,
Type-12
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
Greengram : T-44, Pant mung-1,
increase the drought
Pant mung-2, Samrat, Malviya,
tolerance in nursery /
Janpriya, Malviya jyoti, Narendra
standing crops
mung-1
Life saving irrigation in
Blackgram : Narendra urd-1,Pant
transplanted rice
urd-25, Pant urd-19, Uttara,
Maize Intercropping/ mixed
Type-9
cropping of Greengram/
Blackgram/maize/sorghum/
Pearlmillet with long
duration varieties of
pigeonpea
Land preparation for
15
sowing of early rabi crops
like potato,toria,lahi and
mustard
Pigeonpea September Pigeonpea -
Varieties Bahar, PDA-11, Pusa-9
should be done till Ist week of
September.
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought (Normal Crop management
situation system conservation measures Implementation
onset)
Normal onset Deep clay loam soils Rice After seeding of rice if there is break Weeding at critical stages • Supply of inter
followed by 15-20 of monsoon by 7 to 10 days and if cultural
days dry spell after seedling mortality is observed then Foliar praying of 2.5 kg implements
sowing leading to Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to through RKVY
re-sowing with the same variety
poor germination/ increase the drought • Farm ponds
crop stand etc. tolerance in nursery / through IWSM
Gap filling/transplanting in rice
standing crops programme
• Pulse crop seeds
Using “Sanda” method, plant
Life saving irrigation supply through
polulation can be maintainted with
NFSM
sufficient number of tillers in late Proper electricity
drought condition as to minimize the monitoring/rostering
production losses system should be ensured
in area for regular supply
of electricity for pumping
of water for life saving
irrigation
Maize Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil moisture
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain
optimum plant population
16
Pigeonpea Leaf mulching to
Ridge sowing
conserve the soil moisture
Gap filling/ Thinning to maintain
optimum plant population
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season drought
(long dry spell,
Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
consecutive 2 weeks Crop managementc
situationa systemb conservation measuresd Implementatione
rainless (>2.5 mm)
period)
At vegetative stage Deep clay loam soils Rice Gap filling/transplanting in rice Weeding as to conserve the
residual soil moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to boost
up the growth Leaf mulching to conserve the
soil moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea +
2.5 kg Potash as to increase the
drought tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation from the
stored water during the rainy
season.
Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering system
should be ensured in area for
regular supply of electricity for
pumping of water for life saving
irrigation
Maize Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2% MOP to
Blackgram/ Greengram distance between the plants. increase the resistance to drought
17
Pigeonpea
Frequent interculture Leaf mulching to conserve the
soil moisture
Earthing up in Pigeonpea
Conservation furrow
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to boost
up the growth
Life saving irrigation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season
Major Farming Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought (long dry Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management
situation conservation measures Implementation
spell)
At flowering/ Deep clay loam soils Rice Foliar spraying of 2% urea Weeding as to conserve the
fruiting stage to boost up the growth residual soil moisture
Leaf mulching to conserve the
soil moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea +
2.5 kg Potash as to increase the
drought tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation from the
stored water during the rainy
season.
Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering system
should be ensured in area for
regular supply of electricity for
pumping of water for life saving
irrigation
18
Maize Thinning to maintain Foliar spraying of 2% MOP to
Blackgram/ Greengram proper distance between increase the resistance to drought
the plants.
Pigeonpea Leaf mulching to conserve the
Frequent interculture soil moisture
Earthing up in Pigeonpea Conservation furrow
Life saving irrigation
Foliar spraying of 2% urea
to boost up the growth
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Terminal drought Normal
Major Farming Remarks on
(Early withdrawal of Crop/cropping Crop management Rabi Crop planning
situation Implementation
monsoon) system
Deep clay loam soils Rice Alternate management of Better pulverization should be made for
irrigation should be ensured for conservation of soil moisture following
provide life saving irrigation
by planking for sowing of early rabi
crops like toria and potato etc..
Proper electricity monitoring/
rostering system should be
Toria variety- type-9, type-36, PT-303,
ensured in area for regular
PT-30 and ageti Rai should be sown in
supply of electricity for 1st week of September while Bhawani
pumping of water for life variety can be sown in 2nd week of
saving irrigation September.
In fallow fields to sow Ageti rai, potato
varieties like Kufri Ashoka, Kufri
Chandra mukhi and other vegetable
crops like spinach,reddish coriander etc.
19
Maize Harvesting of intercrop at Better pulverization should be made for
physiological maturity (Maize, conservation of soil moisture following
Blackgram and Greengram)
by planking for sowing of early rabi
crops like toria and potato etc..
Earthing up of Pigeonpea
Harvesting of green cobs
Toria variety- type-9, type-36, PT-303,
(maize) and sell in market and
PT-30 and ageti Rai should be sown in
remaining portion will be used
1st week of September while Bhawani
for fodder.
variety can be sown in 2nd week of
September.
Life saving irrigation to
Blackgram/ pigeonpea if possible.
Greengram
Pigeonpea -
2.1.2 Drought - Irrigated situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping systemh Implementationj
systemg
Delayed release of water in -
canals due to low rainfall
Limited release of water in -
canals due to low rainfall
Non release of water in canals -
under delayed onset of
monsoon in catchment
Lack of inflows into tanks due -
to insufficient/ delayed onset
of monsoon
Insufficient groundwater Sandy clay loam Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Sorghum\ Pearl millet Conservation tillage,
recharge due to low rainfall soils Lentil
Sowing of Pearl millet
& Sorghum for grain
20
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measuresi Remarks on
situationf Crop/cropping systemh Implementationj
systemg
purposes at 45 cm on
ridges.
Foliar application of
2% MOP
Use of mulches
(straw/dust).
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a short span leading Vegetative stage Flowering stage Crop maturity stage Post harvest
to water logging
Rice Provide drainage Proper bunding, drain out Harvesting at Shift to safer place
excess water physiological maturity
Wheat Provide drainage Drain out excess water Harvesting at Shift to safer place
physiological maturity
Pigeonpea Provide drainage and Make inter-row furrow to Harvesting at Shift to safer place
Practice of sowing on ridges Drain out excess water physiological maturity
Heavy rainfall with high speed winds in a short - - - -
span2
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to
unseasonal rains
Rice, Wheat, Chickpea, Pigeonpea, Pearl millet Need based plant protection Need based plant protection Need based plant Safe storage against
(integrated pest and disease (integrated pest and disease protection (integrated stored grain pest and
management) management pest and disease diseases
management
21
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice • Arrangement of Drainage channel • Removal of excess water Provide drainage Harvesting at physiological
• Drainage of water from the rice • Drainage of excess water • Prevent premature seed maturity
fields through drainage channel germination Shift produce to safer place
• Raise community nursery in the should be made. • Foliar spray of 5% urea Provision for buying /
village marketing of discoloured grain
at the earliest to provide relief
Maize Provide drianage , creation of Divergent drain be made to Divergent drain be made to
surface drains at appropriate places collect runoff at suitable points collect runoff at suitable
to avoid water logging
either in artificially created points either in artificially
Removal of silt from contour
ponds or diverting to wells. created ponds or diverting
staggered trenches
to wells.
Divergent drain be made to collect
runoff at suitable points either in
artificially Created ponds or
diverting to wells.
Drainage of excess water through
drainage channel should be made.
Continuous submergence
for more than 2 days2
Rice • Drainage of excess water through • Just after finishing of floods, If crops fails due to water • Preference should be given
drainage channel topdressing of urea could be logging caused by excess for planting of Autumn
• Transplanting of deep water rice – ensured in the field rainfall, then resowing by Sugarcane in the month of
Madhupur, Jalmagn, Jalpriya, Oct so that their grand growth
end week of August or
Jalnidhi, Awarodhi completed to the maxi. Extent
early maturing varieties of
prior to floods.
In low lying areas; crops should be taken • Planting of Sugarcane on
raised beds instead of flat bed.
1. Water stagnation upto 30-50 cm Drainage of excess water • Emphasis could be given for
22
ht.- Mahsuri, Jal lahri, Swarna, Sabha through drainage channel cultivation of Toria,
mahsuri should be made. Blackgram,
2. Water stagnation upto 50-100 cm Greengram/Sunflower
height – Chakya-69, Madhukar,
If top dressing of urea is
Jalpriya
not possible due to water
3. >100 cm height – Jalnidhi,
stagnation/floods, then
Jalmagna
foliar spray of 5% urea
4. Water logging- Awarodhi,
solution can be done.
Madhukar
Drainage of excess water through
drainage channel should be made.
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone
Suggested contingency measurer
Extreme event type
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wave
Rice Provide watering • Provide light Irrigation interval should be decreased -
Light and frequent irrigation during night irrigation
• Irrigation interval
should be decreased
Wheat - - Provide light irrigation Harvesting at
physiological
maturity
Pigeonpea • Mulching • Irrigation interval • Irrigation interval should be decreased -
should be decreased
Cold wave
Wheat Provide light irrigation Provide light Provide light irrigation -
23
irrigation
Pigeonpea Mulching Light irrigation for Light irrigation for survival Harvesting at
survival physiological
maturity
Frost Not applicable
Hailstorm Not Applicable
Cyclone Not Applicable
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
Feed and fodder availability • Storage of straw and silage in Silo pit according - -
to population of animal
Drinking water • Maintenance and inspection of Tubewells, - -
Handpumps, Ponds,
Tanks etc.
• Vaccination of animals against FMD, HS, B.Q. - -
Health and disease management
and Dewarming
Floods
Feed and fodder availability • Increase the area of fodder • Availability of safe place for • Sowing of rabi fodder crops
the animals - Berseems, Lucerne, Oat and other rabi
crops
Drinking water • Crops according to popu. and their storage • Distribution of stored feed and
• Drain of infected stored water and supply
fodders according to the popu.
of fresh water for drinking.
of affected
Health and disease management • Arrangement of clean drinking water in sufficient • Provide neat & clean drinking • Proper treatment of affected (animals
24
water in growth water vaccination & Dewarming)
Cyclone Not applicable
Feed and fodder availability • • -
Drinking water - - -
Health and disease management - - -
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter/environment management • Shelter house/Farm house should not face directly • Proper availability of shelter,
drinking water and feeds &
fodder as per need of the • Provide shelterbelts of good quality
animals materials
Health and disease management • Ensure the availability of drinking water and as • Routine health check up by veterinary
-
well as electrolytes doctors
s
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/link
ages with
ongoing
Suggested contingency measures programs, if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed -
ingredients - - -
Drinking water • Deep tubewell provide clean drinking • Provide the drinking water • Provide the drinking water -
Health and disease • Vaccination against infectious diseases • Vaccination • Vaccination for infectious -
management diseases such as- Ranikhet,
infectious Coryza, IBD,
25
ILT
Floods
Shortage of feed • Inspection of established Tubewell & other water • Provide the drinking water • Provide the drinking water -
ingredients sources
Drinking water • Vaccination against infectious diseases • Vaccination • Vaccination for infectious -
diseases such as- Ranikhet,
infectious Coryza, IBD,
ILT
Health and disease -
management - - -
Cyclone
Shortage of feed -
ingredients - - -
Drinking water - - - -
Health and disease -
management - - -
Heat wave and
cold wave
Shelter/environmen • Arrangement of proper shelter and cooler/heater to • Maintenance of surrounds temp. and • Heat check up -
t management maintain the proper temp. of the shelter house prevent the birds from direct exposure
of heat/ cold waves
Health and disease • Vaccination • Vaccination • Vaccination -
management
• Availability of neat &
clean water
a based on forewarning wherever available
26
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
Marine
Inland
Arrange for alternative water Sell the produce at minimum acceptable size to the
resources consumer Lime Application
(i) Shallow water depth due to Stocking of Air breathing
insufficient rains/inflow
(ii) Changes in water quality
Increased water temperature
(iii) Any other Decrease dissolve oxygen
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to
Arrange for alternative water Minimum disturbance to the fish i.e. minimum Maintain the pond properly by
insufficient rains/inflow
resources fishing activities liming, manuring and fertlization
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in
ponds / change in water quality -
(iii) Any other
-
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine
Inland
Harvest the large size fish Protect the escape of fish Manage the inlet, outlet structures
along with pond land
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged
(ii) No.of houses damaged
27
(iii) Loss of stock
(iv) Changes in water quality
(v) Health and diseases
B. Aquaculture
(i) Inundation with flood water Make 2.5 m high bylonnet bundry on Check for outlet to remain open
the band of pond Close outlet and open inlet
(ii) Water contamination and changes Treatment of water with Alum and
in water quality Close inlet and divert water receiving channel KmnO
4
(iii) Health and diseases Feeding, liming, manuring and
fertilization of ponds
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, huts etc)
(vi) Any other
3. Cyclone / Tsunami
A. Capture
Marine
(i) Average compensation paid due to
loss of fishermen lives
(ii) Avg. no. of boats / nets/damaged
(iii) Avg. no. of houses damaged
Inland
B. Aquaculture
(i) Overflow / flooding of ponds Stocking of fish sped for a period of 1-2 month
28
(ii) Changes in water quality (fresh Liming
water / brackish water ratio) Lime+alum Harvesting and selling fish seeds
(iii) Health and diseases Lime+alum
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed, Netting of fish+KmnO application
4
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, shelters/huts etc)
(vi) Any other
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
Marine
Inland
B. Aquaculture
(i) Changes in pond environment
(water quality)
(ii) Health and Disease management
(iii) Any other
29