State: Uttar Pradesh
Agriculture Contingency Plan for District: Sultanpur
1.0 District Agriculture profile
1.1 Agro-Climatic/Ecological Zone
Agro Ecological Sub Region (ICAR) Northern Plain, Hot Subhumib (Dry) Eco-sub region (9.2)
Agro-Climatic Zone (Planning Commission) Middle Gangetic Plain Region (IV)
Agro Climatic Zone (NARP) Eastern Plain Zone (UP-9)
List all the districts falling under the NARP Zone* Faizabad,Ambedkarnaagr,Sultanpur,Barabanki,Gazipur,Ballia,Mau,Azamgarh,Jaunpur,Varanas
(*>50% area falling in the zone) i,Bhadohi
Geographic coordinates of district headquarters Latitude Longitude Altitude
26’o16’ N 82o05’ E 311 ft
Name and address of the concerned ZRS/ ZARS/ Directorate of Research, SAU, Kumarganj
RARS/ RRS/ RRTTS
Mention the KVK located in the district with address KVK, Sultanpur(ICAR)
Name and address of the nearest Agromet Field Unit -
(AMFU, IMD) for agro-advisories in the Zone
1.2 Rainfall Normal RF(mm) Normal Rainy days Normal Onset Normal Cessation
(number)
SW monsoon (June-Sep): 807.9 44 3rd week of June 1st week of October
(24th Week) (39th week)
NE Monsoon(Oct-Dec): 72.0 5
Winter (Jan- February) 66.7 3 - -
Summer (March-May) 100.6 7 - -
1
Annual 1005 59 - -
1.3 Land use Geographical Cultivable Forest Land under Permanent Cultivable Land Barren and Current Other
pattern of the area area area non- pastures wasteland under uncultivable fallows fallows
district (latest agricultural use Misc. land
statistics) tree
crops
and
groves
Area (‘000 ha) 438.09 289.5 2.007 54.02 2.3 9.5 7.3 14.6 41 18.08
1. 4 Major Soils (common names like red sandy Area (‘000 ha) Percent (%) of total
loam deep soils (etc.,)*
Silty Loam soils - 80%
Gray soils - -
1.5 Agricultural land use Area (‘000 ha) Cropping intensity %
Net sown area 289.56 152.53%
Area sown more than once 152.11
Gross cropped area 441.67
1.6 Irrigation Area (‘000 ha)
Net irrigated area 252.204
Gross irrigated area 368.329
Rainfed area
Sources of Irrigation Number Area (‘000 ha) Percentage of total irrigated area
Canals 71.01 19.28
Tanks 0.004
Open wells 0.134
Bore wells 17.54 174.05 47.25
2
Lift irrigation schemes
Micro-irrigation
1.7
Other sources (please specify)
Total Irrigated Area 368.329
Area
Pump sets 135 36.6
under
No. of Tractors
major
Groundwater availability and use* (Data No. of blocks/ (%) area Quality of water (specify the problem
field
source: State/Central Ground water Tehsils such as high levels of arsenic, fluoride,
crops
Department /Board) saline etc)
Over exploited &
Critical hortic
ulture
Semi- critical
Safe
Wastewater availability and use
Ground water quality
*over-exploited: groundwater utilization > 100%; critical: 90-100%; semi-critical: 70-90%; safe: <70%
1.7 Major field crops Area (‘000 ha)
cultivated
Kharif Rabi
Grand
Irrigated Rainfed Total Irrigated Rainfed Total Summer
total
Rice 151.20 5.35 156.55 156.55
Maize 0 4.92 4.92 4.925
Pigeonpea 0 8.29 8.29 8.29
Wheat 165.11 2.99 168.11 168.11
Pea 5.81 4.06 9.88 9.88
Chickpea 3.26 0.6 3.87 3.871
3
Rai/Mustard Sugarcane - -
Sugarcane 10.25 10.25
Horticulture crops - Area (‘000 ha)
Fruits
- - -
Horticulture crops - - - -
Vegetables
Medicinal and Aromatic - - -
crops
Plantation crops - - -
Fodder crops Total(000 ha) Irrigated Rainfed
Sorghum 7.69 0 7.69
Bajra 0.24 0 0.24
Maize 5.25 0.32 4.92
Total fodder crop area 11.26 2.97 8.28
Grazing land
Sericulture etc
Others (specify)
4
1.8 Livestock Male (‘000) Female (‘000) Total (‘000)
Non descriptive Cattle (local low yielding) NA NA
Improved cattle
Crossbred cattle 565.22
Non descriptive Buffaloes (local low yielding)
Descript Buffaloes 3378.83
Goat 266.83
Sheep 47.19
Others (Camel, Pig, Yak etc.) 81.80
Commercial dairy farms (Number)
1.9 Poultry No. of farms Total No. of birds (‘000) 260.484
Commercial
Backyard
1.10 Fisheries (Data source: Chief Planning Officer)
A. Capture
i) Marine (Data Source: No. of fishermen Boats Nets Storage
Fisheries Department) facilities (Ice
Mechanized Non- Mechanized Non-mechanized plants etc.)
mechanized (Trawl nets, (Shore Seines, Stake &
Gill nets) trap nets)
ii) Inland (Data Source: No. Farmer owned ponds No. of Reservoirs No. of village tanks
Fisheries Department)
4750 Nil 4078
B. Culture
Water Spread Area (ha) Yield (t/ha) Production (‘000 tons)
i) Brackish water (Data Source: MPEDA/ Fisheries Department) 12558.77 3166 1.57
5
ii) Fresh water (Data Source: Fisheries Department)
Others
1.11 Production and Productivity of major crops
1.11 Name of Kharif Rabi Summer Total Crop
crop residue
Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity Production Productivity
as
('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha) ('000 t) (kg/ha)
fodder
(‘000
tons)
Major Field crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Rice 330.971 189
Maize 4.863 1076.5
Pigeon 8.459 1205
pea
Wheat 465.251 2774.5
Major Horticultural crops (Crops to be identified based on total acreage)
Crop 1 - - - - - - - - - -
1.12 Sowing window for 5
major field crops
Rice Maize Pigeon pea Wheat Pea
(start and end of normal
sowing period)
Kharif- Rainfed 2nd week of June- 1st week of June- - - -
3rd week of July 4th week of June
Kharif-Irrigated 4th week of June- 3rd week of June- - - -
2nd week of August 2nd week of July
Rabi- Rainfed - - 2nd week of October- 1st week of October-3rd 2nd week of October-
2nd week of November week of October 2nd week of November
Rabi-Irrigated - - 2nd week of November- -
6
4th week of December
1.13 What is the major contingency the district is prone to? (Tick mark) Regular Occasional None
Drought (cid:1)
Flood (cid:1)
Cyclone (cid:1)
Hail storm (cid:1)
Heat wave (cid:1)
Cold wave (cid:1)
Frost (cid:1)
Sea water intrusion (cid:1)
Pests and disease outbreak (specify) (cid:1) (cid:1)
Others (specify)
1.14 Include Digital maps of Location map of district within State as Annexure I Enclosed: Yes
the district for
Mean annual rainfall as Annexure 2 Enclosed: Yes
Soil map as Annexure 3 Enclosed: Yes
7
Annexure I
8
9
Annexure II
10
Annexure III
Alluvial plain (0-1% slope)
1. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded .
2. Deep, silty soils, slightly saline and strongly sodic associated with loamy
soils .
3. Deep, fine soils moderately saline and sodic associated with loamy soils,
slightly eroded .
4. Deep, fine soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils slightly
saline and moderately sodic .
5. Deep, loamy soils with moderately water logging associated with loamy
soils with slight salinity/sodicty
6. Deep, silty soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils slightly
saline and slightly sodic .
7. Deep, loamy soils and slightly eroded associated with loamy soils with
moderate salinity and sodicity and moderate water logging.
8. Deep, fine soils and slight salinity and sodicity associated with loamy
soils with moderate salinity and sodicity
9. Deep, silty soils with moderate salinity/sodicity associated with loamy
soils slightly eroded .
Recent Alluvial Plain (1-3% slope)
10. Deep, loamy soils, slightly eroded associated with silty soils and slightly
eroded .
11
2.0 Strategies for weather related contingencies
2.1 Drought
2.1.1 Rainfed situation
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop / Cropping system Change in crop / cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system including variety Implementation
onset)
Deep loamy soils Rice No change Raise Staggered rice nursery -
Delay by 2 weeks should be grown at 15 days
Transplanting/Direct interval in small areas at least
seeding of Medium and two times
1st week of July Short duration varieties of
Paddy Such as NDR-97, SRI system of paddy
NDR-359,NDR-80,NDR- nursery/transplanting are
118, Barami Deep etc. suggested
Silt loam soils Maize Not Change Intercropping/ mixed cropping
of maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet
with long duration varieties of
Pigeonpea
Pigeon Pea Not Change Sowing on raised beds
Intercropping with
maize/Greengram/Blackgram
12
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Change in Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation crop/cropping Implementation
onset) system
Deep loamy soils Rice Direct seedling of • Transplanting of paddy with 3-4 Supply of seed
Delay by 4 weeks short duration seedlings/hill to increasing the plant through govt.
varieties of paddy population 60 hills/m2, instead of 50 agencies i.e. NFSM,
3rd week of July such as NDR-97, hills/m2.
RKVY
NDR-80, NDR-
118, Saket-4. • Pruning of overaged paddy seedlings for
Seed drill under
better establishment and optimum plant
RKVY
stand.
• Thinning of over aged paddy seedlings
for better establishment and optimum
plant stand.
• Foliar spraying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5 kg
Potash as to increase the drought
tolerance.
Mulching with straw/ Grass cover.
Shallow silt loam soils Maize Maize-Prakash, Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
Sartaj, Naveen, maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
Tarun.
duration varieties of Pigeonpea
Pigeonpea Varieties -Bahar, Sowing on raised beds
PDA-11, Pusa,
UPAS-120. Intercropping with
Maize/Blackgram/Greengram
13
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation Crop/cropping system Implementation
onset) system
Deep loamy soils Rice Rice-Wheat Direct seeding of rice Supply of seed
Delay by 6 weeks through govt.
Paddy: Short duration varieties In case of late transplanting of
agencies i.e. NFSM,
1st week of August of paddy such as NDR-97, rice(beyond 20th July) planting should
RKVY
NDR-80,NDR-118, Pant Dhan- be dense by increasing the number of
12 should be transplanted/direct seedlings/hill from 2 to 3 to 3 to 4. Seed drill under
seeding. RKVY
Adopt SRI system of nursery raising
Weeding and interculture
Foliar spraying of 2.5 kg Urea + 2.5 kg
Potash as to increase the drought
tolerance in nursery / standing crops
Life saving irrigation in transplanted
rice
Shallow silt loam Maize Greengram/ Blackgram Intercropping/ mixed cropping of
soils Greengram/ Blackgram/
Greengram: T-44, Pant mung-1, maize/sorghum/ Pearlmillet with long
Narendra mung-1 duration varieties of pigeonpea
Blackgram : Narendra urd-
1,Pant urd-25
Pigeon pea Varieties -Bahar, PDA-11, Pusa,
UPAS-120.
14
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Change in crop/cropping Agronomic measures Remarks on
drought (delayed situation system Implementation
onset)
Deep loamy soils Rice-Wheat Preference should be given Direct sowing Supply of seed
Delay by 8 weeks for sowing of Pearlmillet and through govt.
In case of late transplanting of
Sesame agencies i.e. NFSM,
3rd week of August rice(beyond 20th July) planting
RKVY
should be dense by increasing
Pearlmillet: Pusa 322,
the number of seedlings/hill
323(Hybrid) and WCC-75, Seed drill under
from 2 to 3 to 3 to 4.
Raj-171(Composite) RKVY
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea
Sesame: - Type-4, Type-78,
+ 2.5 kg Potash as to increase
Type-12
the drought tolerance in
nursery / standing crops
Greengram : T-44, Pant
mung-1, Pant mung-2,
Life saving irrigation in
Samrat, Malviya, Janpriya,
transplanted rice
Malviya jyoti, Narendra
Shallow silt loam Maize Intercropping/ mixed cropping
mung-1
soils of Greengram/
Blackgram/maize/sorghum/
Blackgram : Narendra urd-
Pearlmillet with long duration
1,Pant urd-25, Pant urd-19,
varieties of pigeonpea
Uttara, Type-9
Land preparation for sowing
of early rabi crops like
potato,toria,lahi and mustard
Pigeonpea September Pigeonpea -
Varieties Bahar, PDA-11,
Pusa-9 should be done till Ist
week of September.
15
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Early season drought Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
(Normal onset) situation conservation measures Implementation
Deep loamy soils Rice After seeding of rice if Weeding at critical stages -
Normal onset there is break of monsoon
followed by 15-20 Foliar praying of 2.5 kg Urea +
by 7 to 10 days and if
days dry spell after 2.5 kg Potash as to increase the
seedling mortality is
sowing leading to drought tolerance in nursery /
observed then re-sowing
poor standing crops
germination/crop with the same variety
stand etc. Life saving irrigation
Gap filling/transplanting
in rice Proper electricity
monitoring/rostering system
Using “Sanda” method, should be ensured in area for
plant polulation can be regular supply of electricity for
maintainted with pumping of water for life saving
irrigation
sufficient number of
tillers in late drought
condition as to minimize
the production losses
Shallow silt loam Maize Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to conserve the
soils soil moisture
Gap filling/ Thinning to
maintain optimum plant
population
Pigeonpea Ridge sowing Leaf mulching to conserve the
soil moisture
Gap filling/ Thinning to
maintain optimum plant
population
16
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season drought Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Soil nutrient & Remarks on
(long dry spell, situation moisture conservation Implementation
consecutive 2 weeks measues
rainless (>2.5 mm)
period)
Deep loamy soils Rice Gap filling/transplanting in rice Weeding as to conserve
At vegetative stage the residual soil moisture
Leaf mulching to
conserve the soil moisture
Foliar praying of 2.5 kg
Urea + 2.5 kg Potash as to
increase the drought
tolerance in nursery /
standing crops
Life saving irrigation from
the stored water during
the rainy season.
Shallow silt loam Maize/ Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2%
soils Greengram / distance between the plants. MOP to increase the
resistance to drought
Blackgram
Frequent interculture
Leaf mulching to
Pigeon pea
Earthing up in Pigeonpea conserve the soil moisture
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to Conservation furrow
boost up the growth Life saving irrigation
17
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Mid season Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping Crop management Soil nutrient & moisture Remarks on
drought (long dry situation system conservation measues Implementation
spell)
Deep loamy soils Rice Intercultural operations Weeding as to conserve the residual
At flowering/ soil moisture
fruiting stage
Leaf mulching to conserve the soil
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to moisture
boost up the growth
Foliar spray of 2.5 kg urea +2.5 kg
Potash in standing crop.
Mulching
Life saving irrigation from the stored
water during the rainy season.
Loam soils Maize/ Greengram / Thinning to maintain proper Foliar spraying of 2% MOP to
Blackgram/ Pigeon pea distance between the plants. increase the resistance to drought
Frequent interculture Leaf mulching to conserve the soil
moisture
Earthing up in Pigeonpea
Conservation furrow
Foliar spraying of 2% urea to Life saving irrigation
boost up the growth
Condition Suggested Contingency measures
Terminal drought Major Farming Normal Crop/cropping system Crop management Rabi Crop planning Remarks on
(Early withdrawal of situation Implementation
monsoon)
Rice In case of fallow land
Foliar spray of 2.5 kg Potash 2.5 sowing of Toria, Type-9,
kg urea as to create drought PT 303 and Ageti Rai
should be sown in Ist
18
tolerance week of September while
Bhawani variety can be
Alternate management of sown in 2nd week of
irrigation should be ensured for September.
provide life saving irrigation
Maize Harvesting of intercrop at Better pulverization
Blackgram/ Greengram physiological maturity (Maize, should be made for
Blackgram and Greengram)
conservation of soil
moisture following by
Earthing up of Pigeonpea
planking for sowing of
Harvesting of green cobs (maize) early rabi crops like toria
and sell in market and remaining and potato etc..
portion will be used for fodder.
Life saving irrigation to Toria variety- type-9,
pigeonpea if possible. type-36, PT-303, PT-30
and ageti Rai should be
sown in 1st week of
September while Bhawani
variety can be sown in 2nd
week of September.
Pigeonpea
19
2.1.2 Drought - Irrigated situation
Suggested Contingency measures
Normal
Condition Major Farming Remarks on
Crop/cropping Change in crop/cropping system Agronomic measures
situation Implementation
system
Delayed release of water in Deep clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Short duration rice varieties- NDR Community nursery Breeder’s seed will
canals due to low rainfall Lentil 97, Ratna, Narendra 118, Narendra be supplied by
97, Pant Dhan 12, HUR 105, Induri Direct seeding in small BHU and NDUAT,
Sambha, HUR 2-1, HUR-3022 to be beds. Faizabad.
grown under aerobic condition.
Use of micro-irrigation Seed drills RKVY
systems viz. sprinkler & and supply of seeds
sub-surface irrigation. NFSM
Siliting of canal water/
Govt. Tubewell for
reaching the water at end
tail
Limited release of water in Sandy clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Rice\ Maize \ Sorghum Community nursery,
canals due to low rainfall Lentil
Grow short duration aerobic rice Direct seeding in small
such as NDR 97, NDR 118, Govind, beds.
Vandana, Varanideep, Susk Samrat ,
HUR 105 Use of micro-irrigation
systems viz. sprinkler &
Maize: Malviya hybrid Makka-2, sub-surface irrigation.
Naveen & Jaunpuri
Pearl millet : WCC 75, Raj 171,
Pusa 23
Sorghum: CSH-16, CHS-9, CHS-14,
CSV-13 &CSV-15 should be grown
on ridges for fodder/grain purposes.
20
Non release of water in Sandy clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Shift to only aerobic rice Direct seeding in small
canals under delayed onset Lentil Or Rice may be replaced by pulses beds.
of monsoon in catchment Greengram: Pant Mung -8, PDM-11,
Samrat, Jyoti, Jagriti, Janpriya, Jan Use of micro-irrigation
systems viz. sprinkler &
Chetana & Jan Kalyani
sub-surface irrigation.
Blackgram: Type 9, Pant U 19, Pant
U 35, Narendra Urd 1 & Azad Urd-3
Sesame :Type 4, T-12, T-13,
Shekhar, GT1, TC 25 &TC 289
Lack of inflows into tanks Sandy clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Sorghum\ Pearl millet Conservation tillage,
due to insufficient /delayed Lentil
onset of monsoon Sowing of Pearl millet &
Sorghum for grain
purposes at 45 cm on
ridges.
Foliar application of 2%
MOP
Use of mulches
(straw/dust).
Canal and tubewell
channel should be kept
properly cleaned(free of
weeds) and should be
ensured before watering as
to increase the water use
efficiency
Insufficient groundwater Sandy clay loam soils Rice – Wheat / Pea/ Rice should be replaced with pulses Direct seeding in small
recharge due to low rainfall Lentil (green gram & black gram), oilseeds beds.
(Sesame) in Kharif and wheat by
Chickpea & lentil in Rabi season. .
21
2.2 Unusual rains (untimely, unseasonal etc) (for both rainfed and irrigated situations)
Condition Suggested contingency measure
Continuous high rainfall in a Vegetative stagek Flowering stagel Crop maturity stagem Post harvestn
short span leading to water
logging
Rice Provide drainage Proper bunding, drain out excess Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
water maturity
Wheat Provide drainage Drain out excess water Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
maturity
Pigeonpea Provide drainage and Make inter-row furrow to Drain Harvesting at physiological Shift to safer place
Practice of sowing on ridges out excess water maturity
Heavy rainfall with high speed - - - -
winds in a short span2
Outbreak of pests and diseases due to unseasonal rains
Rice, Wheat, Chickpea, Pigeonpea, Need based plant protection Need based plant protection Need based plant protection Safe storage against stored
Pearl millet (integrated pest and disease (integrated pest and disease (integrated pest and disease grain pest and diseases
management) management management
2.3 Floods
Condition Suggested contingency measureo
Transient water logging/ Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
partial inundation1
Rice • Provide drainage • Removal of excess water • Foliar spray of 5% urea
Maize Provide drianage , Creation of
surface drains at appropriate places
to avoid water logging
Continuous submergence
for more than 2 days2
22
Rice • Drainage of excess water through • Just after finishing of floods, top • Foliar spray of 5% urea • Preference should be given
drainage channel dressing of urea could be for planting of Autumn
• Transplanting of deep water rice – ensured in the field Sugarcane in the month of
Madhupur, Jalmagn, Jalpriya, Oct so that their grand growth
Jalnidhi, Awarodhi completed to the maxi. Extent
prior to floods.
• Planting of Sugarcane on
raised beds instead of flat bed.
• Emphasis could be given for
cultivation of Toria, Urd,
Mung/Sunflower
Sea water intrusion Not Applicable
2.4 Extreme events: Heat wave / Cold wave/Frost/ Hailstorm /Cyclone
Extreme event type Suggested contingency measurer
Seedling / nursery stage Vegetative stage Reproductive stage At harvest
Heat Wavep
Rice Provide watering • Provide light irrigation Irrigation interval should be decreased -
Light and frequent irrigation during night • Irrigation interval should
be decreased
Wheat - - Provide light irrigation Harvesting at
physiological maturity
Pigeonpea • Mulching • Irrigation interval should • Irrigation interval should be decreased -
be decreased
Cold waveq
Wheat Provide light irrigation Provide light irrigation Provide light irrigation -
Pigeonpea Mulching Light irrigation for Light irrigation for survival Harvesting at
survival physiological maturity
Frost Not applicable
23
Hailstorm Not applicable
Cyclone Not applicable
2.5 Contingent strategies for Livestock, Poultry & Fisheries
2.5.1 Livestock
Suggested contingency measures
Before the events During the event After the event
Drought
Storage of straw and silage in silo pit Sowing of seasonal fodder crops for regular
according to population of animal fodder availability.
Properly distribution of stored feeding
Feed and fodder availability materials.
Maintenance and inspection of tubewells, Regular watch of various resources of water
Drinking water hand pumps, ponds, tanks etc. Filling of water tanks, ponds etc. and health of animals.
Health and disease management Vaccination of animals against FMD, HS, BQ
and de-worming
Health camp by veterinarians. Health camp by veterinarians
Floods
Increase the area of fodder crops according to Sowing of rabi fodder crops –berseem,
Feed and fodder availability population and their storage Availability of safe place for the animals Lucerne, oat & other rabi crops
Distribution stored feed and fodders
according to the population affected
areas
Arrangement of clean drinking water in Drain of infected stored water and supply of
Drinking water sufficient amount Provide need and clean drinking water fresh water for drinking
Vaccination of animal and availability of Proper treatment of affected animal,
Health and disease management veterinary medicines Organize heath camp regularly vaccination and dewarmig
24
Cyclone -NA -NA -NA
Feed and fodder availability -
Drinking water -
Health and disease management -
Heat wave and cold wave
Shelter house/farm house should not face Proper availability of shelter, drinking
directly sunlight . Ensured the availability of water and feeds & fodders as per need of Provide shelter belts of good quality of
Shelter/environment management drinking water and as well as electrolytes animals materials
Routine health checkup by veterinarian Routine health checkup by veterinarian
Health and disease management doctors doctors
s based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.2 Poultry
Convergence/linkages with
Suggested contingency measures ongoing programs, if any
Before the eventa During the event After the event
Drought
Shortage of feed ingredients - - - -
Provide the drinking water
Deep tubewell provide clean Provide the drinking
Drinking water drinking water water
Vaccination against infectious
Vaccination against infectious diseases such as Ranikhet,
Health and disease management diseases Vaccination infections, coryza, IBD, ILT
Floods -
25
Shortage of feed ingredients
Inspection of established Vaccination against infectious
tubewell & other water diseases such as Ranikhet,
Drinking water resources Vaccination infections, coryza, IBD, ILT
Vaccination against infection
Health and disease management diseases Vaccination
Cyclone -NA-
Shortage of feed ingredients -NA-
Drinking water -NA-
Health and disease management -NA-
Heat wave and cold wave
Maintenance of
Arrangement of proper shelter surrounding temp,. and
and coolar/heater to maintain prevent the birds from
the proper temp. of the shelter direct exposure of
Shelter/environment management house heat/cold waves Health check up
Health and disease management Vaccination Vaccination Vaccination
Availability of clean water
a based on forewarning wherever available
2.5.3 Fisheries/ Aquaculture
Suggested contingency measures
Before the eventa During the event After the event
1) Drought
A. Capture
26
Marine -NA- -NA-
Inland
Arrangement for alternative water Sell the produce at minimum
resources acceptable size to the consumer Lime Application
(i) Shallow water depth due to
insufficient rains/inflow
Stocking of Air breathing
(ii) Changes in water quality
Turbidity Increased water temperature
(iii) Any other Decrease dissolve oxygen
B. Aquaculture
(i) Shallow water in ponds due to
Arrange for alternative water Minimum disturbance to the fish Maintain the pond properly by liming, manuring and
insufficient rains/inflow
resources i.e. minimum fishing activities fertlization
(ii) Impact of salt load build up in
ponds / change in water quality -
(iii) Any other
-
2) Floods
A. Capture
Marine
Manage the inlet, outlet structures along with pond
Harvest the large size fish Protect the escape of fish land
Inland
(i) No. of boats / nets/damaged
(ii) No.of houses damaged
(iii) Loss of stock
(iv) Changes in water quality
(v) Health and diseases
B. Aquaculture
Stocking of fish sped for a period
(i) Inundation with flood water of 1-2 month
27
(ii) Water contamination and changes
in water quality Liming Lime+alum Harvesting and selling fish seeds
(iii) Health and diseases Lime+alum
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed, Netting of fish+KmnO application
4
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, huts etc)
(vi) Any other
3. Cyclone / Tsunami
A. Capture
Marine
(i) Average compensation paid due to
loss of fishermen lives
(ii) Avg. no. of boats / nets/damaged
(iii) Avg. no. of houses damaged
Inland
B. Aquaculture
Make 2.5 m high nylon net boundary
(i) Overflow / flooding of ponds on the band of pond Check for outlet to remain open Close outlet and open inlet
(ii) Changes in water quality (fresh Close inlet and divert water
water / brackish water ratio) receiving channel Treatment of water with Alum and KmnO
4
(iii) Health and diseases Feeding, liming, manuring and fertilization of ponds
(iv) Loss of stock and inputs (feed,
chemicals etc)
(v) Infrastructure damage (pumps,
aerators, shelters/huts etc)
28
(vi) Any other
4. Heat wave and cold wave
A. Capture
Marine
Inland
B. Aquaculture
(i) Changes in pond environment
(water quality)
(ii) Health and Disease management
(iii) Any other
a based on forewarning wherever available
29