Phone: 0129-2413985
E-mail:-ppa@nic.in
6i'
s6'"tq€8?'d
F.No 3-6l2022-23lrpNvAdvisorv
STrtiRICFrV Government of Ind,a
TRqd'ftqrto-qrurriare-q / Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
TR qd'fr{|T+eqrurRrrnr I Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
+tgRdarur, {rl-fusiffi?qrrdq / Directorate of Ptant Protection, Quarantine & Storage
qrgq4, .rter-dRtERsruo - 121 001/ NH-IV, Faridabad (Haryana) - 121 001
Dated: Z?- .07.2022
To
The Directors of Agriculture
All States/ Union Territories
Sub: Advisory on Fall Army Worm (FAW) Spodoptera frugiperda on Maize -
regarding.
Sir,
I have the honour to bring to your kind notice that the Fall Armyworm (Spodoptera
frugiperda) is an invasive, polyphagous economically important insect pest could cause
substantial damage especially in maize crop. The pest is native to tropical and sub-tropical
regions of America. In India it spread from South India to other parts of the country.
Nevertheless its damage intensity is under control by continuous efforts of DPPQ&S, FAO,
ICAR and State Agricttlture/ Horticulture departments. Keeping in view the favourable
climatic conditions, availability of maize crop throughout country and previous year
observations there is possibility that the pest may cause extensive damage therefore the
following strategies are suggested to prevent the pest attack well in advance
Extensive surveys need to be initiated to map the prevalence and spread of the
pest. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome, Italy developed the FAW
\4onitoring and Early Warning System (FAMEWS) mobile app can used by
farmers, and extension agents to send vital data about FAW infestation levels. This
, helps generate detailed and reliable information that can be used to manage FAW.
This app works offline and provides farmers with advice on how to manage FAW
Follow clean cultivation i.e, removal df alternate hosts helps to break down life
cycle of FAW and hand picking and destruction of egg masses and larvae in mass
by crushing or by immersing in water
o Deep ploughing before sowing will expose FAW pupae to predators.
a Timely and uniform sowing over a large area is advised. Avoid staggered sowing.
o Follow intercropping of maize with suitable pulse crops such as pigeon pea, black
gram/green gram
Erection of bird perches @ T}lacre during early stage of the crop (up to 30 days) as
birds acts as good predator on lepidopteran larvae
To be continued in next page
-2-
Sowing of 3-4 rows of trap crops (e.g. Napier) around maize freld and spray with
5% NSKE or Azadirachtin 1500 ppm as soon as the trap crop shows symptom of
FAW damage.
Application of Sand + lime in 9: I ration in whorls in first thirty days of sowing
soon after the observation of FAw incidence restricts larval feeding
Install pheromone traps @ l5lacre in field for mass trapping and destruction of
male moths
Eggs parasitoids such as Trichogramma pretiosum utd Telemonus remus can be
released for destroying the egg stage of FAW @ 50000 per acre at weekly
intervals (avoid spraying chemical pesticides for few days during the time of
release in the field)
hogenic fungi such as Metarhizium anisopriae, Nomuraea rirevi,
bassiana and verticilium recqni at l x 108 cFU/g @ 5 glritre whorr
& repeat after 10 days if required could be used for management of the
pest,
Bacillus thuringiensrs ver. Kurstaki, NpV formulation @ 2 gll (or) 400 glacre
could be used
IPM package of practices for Maize need to be promoted. The IpM package of
practices can be downloaded from
o
Insecticides must be used as recommended by Registration Committee of
CIB&RC. The recommended list of Pesticides are available at link
if major I i n n c v i i d e e w n c o e f t o h f e F a A bo W ve , i s i t re is p r o e r q te u d e s b te y d t t h o e m fa o r n m it e o r r s t , h e e x t m en a s iz io e n cr o fu p n c o t n io r n e a g r u ie la s r a ba n s d i s e a ve nd n
through newspapers or other sources, survey of the affbcted fields may be conducted
immediately and the concerned officials at the district/ division/ block may be advised to
take the suitable plant protection measures immediately. The detailed information may also
be sent to the Directorate through email ppa@nic.in or appa.ipm-ppqs@gov.in urgently to
apprise the same to Department of Agriculture & Farmers welfare.
Yours faithfuily
Encl: as above
e2l1^1zf
(
PIant Protection Adviser
Copy for information:
1.
2. PPS to p Jo p i A nt Secretary(pp), DA & FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi_ l r000r
PPS to for information
3'
officer In-charges, All cIPMCs with directions to conduct regular survey in the area to
ensure and necessary follow_up with the st rte authorities.