Phone;0129-2413985
E-mail -appa. ipm-ppqs@gov. in
:
F.No 3-6l2022-23llPl\{/Advisory
sTKil{f(fifv Governmeot of India
FRqf frsm+-ecruf qTrf,q/Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
TR q+ frff{ +-eqrut. RrTFf I Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
qrfwR{(8I!I, {rl-ta{iffitcr|nl-c/
Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage
q{gs4, Wft<r+r<1qftfiqD - 121 001/NH-IV, Faridabad (Haryana) - l2t 001
Dated:?J .01.2023
The Director of Agriculture
Maharashtra
Sub: Advisory on management of Helicoverpa spp (Pod borer) in Gram (Chick pea) crop -reg.
Sir,
This is to bring into your kind notice that the incidence of Helicovelpa spp (Pod borer) has
reported in above Economic Threshold level (ETL) from various parts of Chick pea growing areas of
Maharashtra state. The larvae of the pod borer feed on all parts of plant preferably flowers and pods
which causes high yield loss. Keeping in view the current crop stage and prevailing weather conditions
population of these pests are expected to increase. Therefore, Chickpea crop should be monitored
regularly for pest build up and adopt Integrated Pest Management techniques. Agro Ecosystem Analysis
(AESA) based IPM Package of practices of Chickpea are available at DPPQ&S website in the link
The Important IPM practices for management of Pod borer are listed
below:
o
Set up light traps @ 2 trapslha 15 cr4 above the crop for monitoring and mass trapping
?*opy
insects. ft
r
Install Pheromone traps @Slha.
o
Hand picking of grown up larvae.
o
Use trap crops such as Castor, Chrysanthemum, and Marigold around the field to attract the
pest.
o
Grow attractant plants such as Coriander, alfalfa and Nectar rich plants with small flowers i.e.
anise, Caraway, dill, parsley, mustard, Malvaceae sunflower, buck wheat and cow pea to
altract natural enemies to pod borer.
o ' Farmers must be educated to identifu, conserye and augment the natural enemies such as
Parasitoids: Telenomus spp. (egg), Chelonus blackburni (egg-larval), Carcelia spp.
(larvaVpupal), Campoletis chlorideae (larval), Goniophthalmus halli (larval), Bracon spp.
(larval) etc. and Predators: Chrysoperla carnea, coccinellids, King crow, common mynah,
wasp, dragonfly, spider, robber fly, reduviid bug, praying mantis, fire ants, big eyed bugs
(Geoeoris sp), Pentatomid bug (Eocantheconafurcellata), earwigs, ground beetles, rove beetles
etc.
o
Use Azadirachtin0.03%o WSP (300 PPM) Neem Oil use with the waiting period of 7-days.
o
Use of pesticides should be need based and it should be used as per label claim approved by the
s
Contd on page 2.
2
Registration Committee. Detailed information is available on Directorate's website in the link
Further the following strategies should be adopted for spreading awareness among
farmers:
Mobilization of extension functionaries at grass route level for regular monitoring of pests
status.
Awareness among farming community through newspapers, printing and electronic media,
Kisan Gosthi, leaflet and pamphlets.
The concerned offrcials at the district/ division/ block level mav be advised to take the suitable
plant protection measures ifirmediately
The detailed information on pests' incidence may also be sent to the directorate through email
ppa@nic.in or appa.ipm-dppqs@.gov.in urgently to apprise the same to Deparhnent of Agriculture &
Farmers' Welfare.
Yours faithfullv
Encl: as above
(Dr. J'P. Singh)
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy for information:
1. PPS to Joint SecretaryGP), DA & FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi- 110001
2. gr
The Director of Agriculture of other Gram the request to keep close watch on
pest build up & take appropriate measures as
3.
PPS to PPA for information
4.
Officer In-charges, all CIPMCs of Chick pea growing states with a direction to conduct regular
survey in their areas to ascertain the pest incidence level and necessary follow-up with the state
authorities.
s