E-mail: ppa @r-ric.in
ffi efrsilarr eb z o 1292, 4t 3 98 s
*qqlT'ax: 0129 -2412125
qr
d.rno. 3-61201v19,/IPM-Advisory
gfGT lft?fi'R/Government of India
TR qEi Rrqm ryqrur de|E|'q Avlinistry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
TFfiIfrFIVtifuUma;qAfuf framVOepartment of Agriculture, Cooperation& Farmers Welfare
Tfr,
ffiFqfr Ti{qrur, :irrtq (-di'd?r6 frien*q
DIRECTORATE OF PLANT PROTECTION, QUARANTINE & STORAGE
(rd(rq +, q'trarErE Gf|qrutT )at.H. -ry, FAzuDABAD GIARYANA) - 1 2 1 00 1
ftai61Pu1.: 11212018
To
l. ni"..ro",
Agriculture Directorate
Government of Tamil Nadu
Chepauk, Chennai-600005
7 Commissionrate of Agriculture
Government of Maharashtra
Central Building 3'rd floor,
Pune - 411001
Sub:- Advisory on exotic pest Fall Army Worm (FAW) Spodopterafrugiperda on Maize
and Sorghum crop at Tamilnadu and Maharashtra state-reg.
Sir,
I have the honour to bring your kind notice that the incidence of FAW has been
reported at Moderate level on Maize crop in Tamilnadu Maharashtra state and reported at
Moderate level on Sorghum crop in Maharashtra state.
Following strategies are suggested to contain, ,uppr.r. and eradicate the pest population.
1. Extensive surveys need to be initiated to map the prevalence and spread of the pest.
2. All approaches for managing Fall Army Worm with the use of available resources may be
taken uP.
3. Entomopathogenic fungi such as Metarhizium anisopliae, Nomuraea releyi, may be
extensively used for management of the pest.
4. Eggs parasitoids such as Trichogramma sp. And Telemonus remu,s can be released for
destroying the egg stage of FAW. (Avoid spraying any chemical pesticides for few days
during the time of release in the field)
5. Install pheromone traps in field to know the status of moths'
6. Follow clean cultivation practices in field which will expose the fall armywonn pupae to
birds and other predators, helps in reducing the fall arnywolm population.
7. Collect and destroy egg masses and yogng larvae present in field.
8. The following chemical pesticides such as Dimethoate 30o/o EC and Thiamethoxam 12.60/o +
Lambda cyhalothrin 9j% ZC which is recommended for Lepidopteran pests of Mal'ze may
be applied for contro I ling Sp o do p t e r a fr u gi p e r da.
g.
The focus may be given to suppress, contain and eradicate the pest at the earliest.
10. IPM package of practices for Maize and Sorghum need to be promoted. The IPM package of
practices be downloaded from http://ppqs. gov.irVipm-packages
&
For this pulpose, regular meetings with State Pest Surveillance Advisory Unit
(SpSAU) and District Pest Surveillance & Advisory Units (DPSAU) may be conducted. The
host spots of FAW should be identified for survey and teams may be constituted for regular
monitoring of FAW situation and adoption of need based plant protection measures to avoid
economic loss. Timely supply of quality pesticides/bio-pesticides for the control of Fall
- Army Worm on Maize should be ensured'
In view of the above, it is requested to monitor the Maize and Sorghum on regular basis
and if major incidence of FAW is reported by the farmers, extension functionaries and even
through th. ,r.*rpapers or other source, survey of the affected arca may be conducted
immediately and ihe .ottcetned officials at the Division/District/Block'may be advised to
take suitable plant protection measures immediately. The detailed status report may be sent
to this Directorate through Fax O{os. 0129-2412125 or 0lI-23384182) or e-mail:
ppa@nic.in urgently to apprise Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare.
Yours faithfully,
-,
6ui"rffi'4'e
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy to:
1. Additional Secretary (PP), MOA&FW, Krishi Bha#an, New Delhi.
2. Joint Secreiary (PP), DAC&FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi'
3. Agriculture commissioner, Room No. 231, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
4.
PS to PPA.
5. Officers I/Cs of CIPMCs- Trichy, Nagpur and Nasik for close watch of this pest.
6.
IT-cell, DPPQ&S