E-mail: ppa@nic.in
tddfalr
ffi elr"z 0129241 398s
*qglFax: 0129-2412125
Y;t TI.A'{o. 3-6 |z0I8-lgllPM-Adviso ry
e{f{ET RrFWGovernment of India
Tfr qd Gilfrfr qcrw t'*rra /Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
gfr, u6aftarqdFiF-gtaqqrqframrDstartment of Agriculture, Cooperation& Farmers Welfare
q.fi€qfr dqHur, ,i?rtq (rdi d"r6 fttqntrq
DIRECTORATE OF PLANT PROTECTION, QUARANTINE & STORAGE
(rd('r[ 4, qtrilqrq Gftq]urT )^tr.H.-rv, FARIDABAD (HARYANA) - 121001
fui*'lDate:2511012018
ao
The Director
Director of Agriculture & Food Production
Govt. of Odisha
Bhubaneswar- 751001
Sub: Current status of Bacterial Leaf Blight (Xanthomonss campestris pv oryzael at
Rice growing areas of Odisha-Advisory reg.
Sir,
i have the honour to bring your kind notice that incidence of Bacterial leaf blight
(Xanthomonas campestris.pv oryzae) on Rice crop has been reported at Low to Moderate level
in Balianta and Balipatna blocks of Khorda district and Pipali block of Puri district of Odisha
state. its incidence may further spread in other rice growing areas of state if favourable weather
conditions prevail.
Keeping in view of the severity of the pest, it is advised that the all rice growing areas
of Odisha state may be intensively monitored during Rapid Roving Survey for assessment of
infestation of Bacterial leaf blight. Therefore, strong linkage among State Agriculture
Department, State Agricultural University, ICAR Institutes and farmers to implement
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) at village level need to be developed.
The following practices of IPM strategies may be followed for management of Bacterial
Leaf Blight in Rice crop
1. Reduce nitrogen application and apply if needed only small dose of nitrogen in more split
doses, chemicals as recommended earlier'
2. Avoid field to field inigation.
3. Farmers should be advised through extension functionaries to use only recommended doses
of fertilizers and pesticides as pel approved label claims by CIB&RC.
4. A strong and foolproof quality control system for fertilizers, bio-fertilizers, pesticides needs
to be enforced.
5. Regular training programme for the extension workers, pesticide dealers and farmers should
organized by the SAUs/ICAR institutes/ClPMCs/ KVKs for up-gradation of their knowledge
and skill regarding management of Stem borer.
6. Insecticides must be used as per label claim approved by the Central Insecticides Board and
RegistrationCommittee,Detai1edinformationisavailableat
rclmajor-uses-of-pesticides However, list of recommended pesticides for Bacterial Leaf
Blight is attached. (Annexure-I)
7, IPM package of practices for rice need to be promoted. The IPM package of practise for rice
may b e downlo aded from web-link. http : //ppq s. gov. inlsites/default/fi I es/rice. pdf
i I f n view of the above, it is advised to undertake monitoring of rice crop on regular basis
and any more infestation of Bacterial leaf blight is reported by the farmers, extension
functionaries and even through the newspapers or other source, survey of the affected area
may be conducted immediately and the concerned officials at the Division/District/Block
may be advised to take.suitable plant protection measures immediately. The detailed status
report may be sent to this Directorate through Fax Qrlos. 0129 _241212i or 0ll_233g41g2) or
e--mail: Wa@,nic.in or aPPa.iPm-PPQs@govfu urgently to a'p prise Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare.
.
Yours faithfullv.
.,
lNlunv\
/AIIMlft , z
r-
( D.D.K.Sharma)
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy to:
1.
Joint Secretary (PP), DAC&FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
2.
Agriculture commissioner, Room No. 231, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
3.
PS to PPA.
4'
Officer I/C of ClPMc-Bhubaneswar is instructed to keep close watch on the infestation of
Bacterial Leaf Blight in rice and be in touch with the state Government for follow up action.
5, IT- Cell for uploading on Dppe&S, website.
Annexure-f
@