lffi+re1e012924r3985
ttffi/Fa*,
0129-2412125
E-mail: ppa@nic.in
f6 ilrt r?i-l{ ti ?m
!-R{./F. No. 3-6120 I 8-1 9/IPM
qniruf*nfqlGov ern m ent of India
@Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Cfft, ooPeration & Farmers Welfare)
DIRECTORATE OF PLAN'I' PROTECTION, QUARANTINE & STORAGE
qqgq4, o-ftoqrdr6ftqTuDal.H -lv. FARIDABAD (HARYANA) - l2l00l
ftqffi7Pn1.: ugust,2018
To
The Director of Agriculture,
Departrnent of Agriculture,
Sheshadri Road. K.R Circle,
Bangalore- 56000 l, Karnataka
Subject: Advisory on exotic pest Fall Army Worm (FAW) Spodoptera frugiperda if occurrence
found on Maize or other crops -regarding
Sir.
I have the honour to bring to your kind notice that Maize is an cmerging third most important
cereal crop afier rice and wheat in India. Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Bihar,
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat account for 85 per cent of India's maize production.
Recently the occunence of a new invasive exotic pest Spodoptera.frugiperda, a lepidopteran
insect has been suspected on Maize crop in Karnataka. CIPMC Bangalore is conducting surveys in
aff-ected districts of Bangalore, Chikkaballapur, Hassan, Shimoga districts of Karnataka along with the
scientists of National Bureau of Agricultural Insect Resources (NBAIR) and Indian institute of Millets
Research (IIMR) ICAR and University of Agricultural Sciences (UAS).
As the pestspodoptera.frugiperdais polyphagus pest as per the available literature, efTorts are
needed to manage the pest and contain its further spread. It may further spread and attack maize and
other crops in the difl-erent states, and it is a matter of concern'
Following strategies are suggested to contain. suppress and eradicate the pest population.
o Extensive surveys need to be initiated to to map the prevalence and spread of the pest.
. All approaches for manageing Fall Army Worm with the use of available resources n-iay be
taken up.
. Egg parasitoids such as Trichogramma sp. and Telemonu,s remus can be released fbr destroying
the egg stage of FAW.(Avoid spraying any chemical pesticides lbr f-ew days during the time of
release in the field) '
o The fbllowing Chemicals pesticides such as Dimethoate 30 % EC and Thiamethoxam 12.6%" +
Lambda cyhalothrin 9.5 % ZC which is generally used against Lepidoptera pests of Maize may
be applied for controlling Spodoptera frugiperda .
o Nuclear Polyhedrosis virus (NPV), Entomopathogenic fungi such as Nomuraea releyi,
Metarhizium ani.sopliae may be extensively used fbr management of the pest.
. An,v report of incidence o1' this pest in other districts of Karnataka, the Department of
Agricr.rlture may infbrm to CIIPMC' Bengaluru and submit the insect specimen to NBAII
Bengaluru fbr confirmation.
i 'Ihe fbcus may be given to suppress. contain and eradicate the pest at the earlist.
.
IPM package of practices fbr Maize need to be promoted. The IPM package of practices for
Maize may be downloaded liom I or
http :i/farmer. sov. idlPMpackageof practices.html.
For this purpose, regular meetings of State Pest Surveillance & Advisory Unit (SPSAU) and
District Pest Surveillance & Advisory Units (DPSAU) may be conducted. The hot spots of FAW
should be identified for survey and teams may be constituted for regular monitoring of FAW situation
and adoption of need based plant protection measures to avoid economic loss. Timely supply of quality
pesticides/ bio-pesticides fbr the control of Fall Army Worm on Maize should be ensured.
In view of the above, it is requested to monitor the Maize crop on regular basis and if maior
incidence o1'FAW is reported by the f'armers, extension functionaries and even through the newspapers
or other source, survey of the aff'ected area may be conducted immediately and the concemed officials
at the Division/District/Block may be advised to take the suitable plant protection measures
-fhe
irnmedialely. detailed infbrmation may also be sent to this Directorate through Fax (Nos. 0129-
2412125 or 01 I -23384182) or e-mail: pga(@,nic.in urgently to appraise the Department of Agriculture,
Cooneration & Farmers Welfare,
Yours faithfully
NNW
(D.D.K Sharma)
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy to: l. Additional Secretary (PP). MOA&FW, Krishi Bhawan. New Delhi.
2. Joint Secretary (l)P)- DAC & FW. Krishi Bharvan. New Delhi,
3. Agriculture Clourmissioner. Room No 231. Krishi Bhawan. New Delhi
4. PS to PPA
f,. Officer i/Cs of CIPMCs- Karanataka (Bengaluru), Maharasthra (Nagpur & Nashik),
(Andhra Pradesh) Vijayawada, (Telengana) Hyderabad for close watch of this pest.
IT- Cell, DPPQ&S