E-mail: ppa@nic.in
ffi ffffa/T
ele: 0129241 3985
*qS/Fa*:
0129-2412125
tl-t {f .,t{o. 3-6 12018-I9/IPM-Advisory
tlRd T*FE/Government of India
Tfr qii fuqra oaqpr d'Trffq,Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Tfr, Ff,fiIRIdIq?ifuTrdf Efi-aqpf RamfOepartment of Agriculture, Cooperation& Farmers Welfare
ffi€qfr TiTqpr', ,irR'l?T lri+16 frtlnrq
DIRECTORATE OF PLANT PROTECTION, QUARANTINE & STORAGE
(!-4('t[ 4, qtETqTE (6ftq]ulT )^tr.H.-TV, FARIDABAD (HARYANA) - 12IOO1
Eaia'/o ate :oJ AIan uary, Z0lg
To
The Director
Director of Agriculture & Food Production
Govt. of Odisha
Bhubaneswar- 75 1001- Odisha
Sub: Current status of Tobacco Caterpillar (Spodoptera litara) on Groundnut crop at
Odisha state -Advisory reg.
Sir,
During Joint Survey carried out during l5th December 2018, the incidence of Tobacco
Caterpillar on Groundnut crop has been reported at Moderate to severe level in Athamallik
block of Anugul district of Odisha state. Its incidence may further spread in other Groundnut
growing areas of state if favourable weather conditions prevail.
Keeping in view of the severity of the pest, it is advised that the all Groundnut growing
areas of Odisha state may be intensively monitored during Rapid Roving Survey fbr
assessment of infestation of Tobacco caterpillar. Therefore, strong linkage among State
Agriculture Department, State Agricultural University, ICAR Institutes and farmers to
implement Integrated Pest Management (IPM) at village level need to be developed.
The following practices of IPM strategies may be'followed for management of Tobacco
caterpillar in Groundnut crop
1. Farmers must be educated to identify, conserve and augment the natural enemies available in
the Groundnut fields. Such as parasitoids like Trichogramma chilonis, Tetrastichus spp.,
Telenomus spp., Chelonus blackburni, Carcelia spp., Campoletis chlorideae, Eriborus
argentiopilosus, Microplitis sp. etc. and predators like Chrysoperla cernea, coccinellids,
King crow, common mynah, wasp, dragonfly, spider, robber fly, reduviid bug, praying
mantis, fire ants, big eyed bugs (Geocoris sp.), pentatomid bug (Eocanthecona furcellata),
earwigs, ground beetles, rove beetles etc.
2.
Collect and destroy egg masses and early instar larvae present in the field.
3.
Install pheromone traps @ 5lharn field for monitoring and trapping of S. Liturq.
4'
Release Telenomus remus @ 50000/hain 4 times (7-10 days interval) based on pheromone
trap catching.
J.
Use bio-pesticides such as Beauveria bassiana, Metarhizium sp. etc.
6.
Spray S. litura NPV @ 250 LE (6 x I}elLE)/ha or Bt @ I kgl hawhen large number of egg
masses and early instar larvae are noticed.
7.
Spray 5% Neem Seed Kernel Extract.
8.
Farmers should be advised through extension functionaries to use only recommended doses
of fertilizers, bio-fertilizers, pesticides & bio-pesticides as per approved label claims by
CIB&RC.
9. A strong and foolproof quality control system for fertilizers, bio-fertilizers, pesticides & bio-
pesticides needs to be enforced.
10. Regular training programme for the extension workers, pesticide dealers and farmers should
organized by the SAUs/ICAR institutes/ClPMCs/ KVKs for up-gradation of their knowledge
and skill regarding management of Tobacco caterpillar.
1 1. Insecticides must be used as per label claim approved by the Central Insecticides Board and
Registration Committee, Detailed information is available at http://ppqs.gov.inldivisions/cib-
-
rclmajor-uses-of-pesticides However, and list of recommended pesticides for Tobacco
caterpillar is attached. (Annexure-I)
12. IPM package.of practices for groundnut need to be promoted. The IpM package of practise
may be downloaded from web-link. htto:l
In view of the above, it is advised to undertake monitoring of groundnut crop on regular
basis and if any more infestation of Tobacco caterpillar is reported ty the farmers, extension
functionaries and even through the newspapers ot oth., source, srrvey of the affected area rnay
be conducted immediately and the concerned officials at the Division/District/Block may b!
advised to take suitable plant protection measures immediately. The detailed status report may
be sent to this Directorate through Fax (l.tros. 0129-2412125 or 0II-233841g2) oi e-maii:
ppa@nic'in or appa'ipm-ppqs@gov.in urgently to appraise Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare.
Yours faithfullv.
-,
(nuj.rrffi,lt
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy to:
1.
Joint Secretary (PP), DAC&FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
2.
Agriculture commissioner, Room No. 231, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
3.
PS to PPA.
4.
Officer I/C of ClPMc-Bhubaneswar is instructed to keep close watch on the infestation of
Tobacco caterpillar in groundnut and be in touch with the state Governmenr for follow up
action.'
5. IT- Cell for uploading on DPpe&S, website.
Annexure-I
APPROVED USES OF REGISTERED INSECTICIDES FOR TABACCO
CATERPILLAR ON GROUNDNUT
W.aitiqg
Ptriod
{dayq
'