?ffiq/rele01292413985
ilRlT'a*:
0129-2412125
ffi
E-mail: ppa@nic.in
qa€.1r.
No. 3-6/2018-19/IPM
ltlTifg{tFR/Government f lndia
o
@tmqfvtnistry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
(Ffr, @qm)/ (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers
Welfare)
TrrgftriTqfur,@
DIRECTORATE OF'PLANT PROTECTION, QUARANTINE & STORAGE
qqqq4,qftCrqrd(€ftqrurDnr.H.-Tv,FARTDABAD(ITARYANA)-12i001
Rqifi/Date: l2th October, 2018
Pest Advisorv No. -14 of 2018
Sub: Advisory on exotic pest Fall Army Worm (FA\Y) Spodopterd frugiperda if
__
occurrence found on Maize or other crops- regarding
Officer Incharges of RCIPMCs/ CIPMCs are aware that Fall Army Worm (FAW) is a
polyphagous pest effecting more than 80 crops however Maize is the preferred host plant. During
in the month of July 2018 for the first time FAW incidence has been reported from Karnataka, in
a short span of time its presence has been observed in Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Telangana,
Odisha, Gujarat and Chhattisgarh. Now recently reports are coming up regarding its presence in
West Bengal. As the pest has, an ability to carry over by wind currents there is a high chance to
spread to the adjoining states. In this regard all the CIPMCs in the Central, North, East and North
East India are instructed to clqsely watch for the pest incidence and conduct extensive survey in
Maize and other preferred hosts of Poaceae family such as Sugarcane, Rice, Sorghum, Millets,
other grasses etc. CIPMCs are already provided with literature on FAW for identifrcation and
IPM guide developed by FAO. If the presence of FAW is suspected, it is advised to immediately
inform the Directorate and following management strategies may be adopted to contain, suppress
and eradicate the pest population.
.
Egg parasitoids such as Trichogrammq sp. and Telemonus remus can be released for
destroying the egg stage of FAW. (Avoid sprayi4g any chemical pesticides for fef days
during the time of release in the field).
o
Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus (NrPV), Entomopathogenic fungi such as Nomuraea releyi,
Metarhizium anisopliae may be extensively used for management of the pest.
.
The following Chemicals pesticides such as Dimethoate 30 % EC and Thiamethoxam
12.6% + Lambda cyhalothrin 9.5 % ZC which is generally used against Lepidoptera pests
.
of Maize may be applied for controlling Spodopterafrugiperda.
IPM package of practices for Maize need to be promoted. The IPM package of practices
for Maize- may be downloaded from http://ppqs.gov.inlipmpakpra-revised.html or
htto : I I farmer. eov. in/IPMp acka ge o f practice s. html'
The CIpMCs are advised to monitor the Maize crop and other hosts of FAW on regular
basis. If incidence of FAW is reported by the farmers, extension functionaries and even through
the newspapers or other source, survey of the affected area may be conducted immediately and
the concerned officials at the DivisionlDistrict/Block may be advised to take the suitable plant
protection measures immediately.The hot spots of FAW should be identified for survey and
i.u., may be constituted for regular monitoring of FAW situation and adoption of need based
plant protlction measures to uuoid economic loss. Timely supply of bio-control agents for the
control of Fall Army Worm on Maize should be ensured. The detailed information may also be
sent to this Directorate through Fax O{os. 0I2g-24I2125 or 011-23384182) or e-mail:
ryurgenttytoappraisetheDepartmentofAgriculture,Cooperation&FarmersWelfare.
-M#T>
I
(D.D.K Sharma)
Plant Protection Adviser
Officer Incharges
RCIPMCs/ CIPMCS
Copy to for information:
1. Additional Secretary (PP), MOA&FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
2. Joint secretary (PP), DAC & FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
3. Agriculture c'ommissioner, Room No 231,Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
4. Officer I/Cs of CIPMCs- Kolkata, Gangtok, Guwahati, Shillong, ltanagat, Dimapur,
Imphal, Aizwal, Agarthala, Ranchi, Patna, Dehradun, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Agra,
Indore, Jaiptir, Sriganganagar, Faridabad, Jalandhar, Solan, Jammu and Srinagar for
close watch of FAW.
5. IT- Cell for uploading on DPPQ&S, website'