Phone: 0129-2413985
E-mail:-ppa@nic.in
F.No 3-6/2022-23llPl0Advisorv
T|-r<RfcFIV Government of India
TR q* ftsrt +-eqrur q'Trmq / Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
TR q{ ftqr{ +qrq Rqm I Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
qtwR {<qTut, ftrfu qt ffi?cr|-{q / Directorate of-Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage
5F4, s.ftqrqr<t$srqO - l2l 001/ NH-IV, Faridabad (Haryana) - 121 001
Dated: LL .07.2022
To
The Director of Farmers Welfare and Agriculture Development
2nd Floor, 'C'-Wing, Vinyachal Bhawan, Arera Hills,
Goverment of Madhya Pradesh
Bhopal (M.P.) - 462004
Sub: Advisory on Hairy Caterpillar (Spilosoma obliqua) on Soybean crop in
Madhya Pradesh -reg.
Sir,
I have the honor to bring to your notice that Hairy caterpillar (Spilosoma obliqua)
is pollphagous and sporadic pest mainly attacking soybean crop especially in western
Madhya Pradesh. When favourable condition prevails, this pest also causes severe damage to
crops such as oilseeds, pulses, vegetables, fodder, fibre crops, and fruit trees. The larvae are
voracious feeders, damaged leaves of the plant appear in skeletonised/web form and its population
often reaches epidemic level during that time they completely defoliate the plants and move from
one field to another field, feeding up all the vegetation ofthat area.
Keeping in view the availability of soybean crop & prevailing favourable weather
conditions for the pest the soybean crop should be monitored regularly for pest build up
and adopt Integrated Pest Management techniques. AESA based IPM Package of practices
of Soybean pest specific package of practices of Hairy Caterpillar are available at DPPQ&S
website in the link . Important IPM practices are listed
below.
. o Pre-monsoon deep ploughing (two/three times) will expose the hibernating
pupae to smlight and predatory birds.
o
Collect & destroy infested plant parts, egg masses and young larvae.
o
Maintain the field bunds clean and hygiene.
o
Intercrop soybean either with (early maturing) pigeon pea variety or maize or sorghum
in the sequence of 4:2.
o
Removal and destruction of alternate wild hosts and weeds which harbour the hairv
caterpillars
o
Grow trap crops like cowpea, castor and jatropha on field bunds to attract the
caterpillar.
o
Install one light trap (i.e., 200Wats mercury vapour lamp) per hectare to catch the
.
adults of hairy caterpillar (positively phototropic).
o
Setting of bonfires to kill migrating larvae.
o
Digging of bunds & trenches to kill migrating larvae
o
Conserve the bio control population of spiders, long horned grasshoppers, praying
...........To be continued in next
-L-
mantis, robber fly, ants, green lace wing, damsel flies' dragon flies, flower bugs, shield
bugs, lady bird beetles, ground beetle, predatory cricket, Braconids, Trichogrammatids'
crude extracts of Mahogany & Karanja leaves in neem oil individually and in
combination by equal amount of water (1:1 ratio) could kill Hairy caterpillar due to
presence of feeding deterrents and toxic components extract in neem oil'
Spraying of Bacillus thuringiensis Krustakii, Serotype H-3a, 3b, Strain Z-5t2 @ 750
glhain 500-700 Ltrs water.
pesticide must be used as per label claim approval by the Registration committee'
Detailed information is available aI directorate website'
http i/ppqs. gov. in/divisions/cib-rc/maj or-uses-of-pesticides
:
Further the following strategies should be adopted for spreading awareness among
farmers
o Mobilization of extension functionaries at grass route level for regular monitoring of
pest status.
o Awareness among farming community through newspapers, printing and electronic
media, KisanGosthi, leaflet and pamphlets'
o The concemed officials at the district/ division/ block level mav be advised to take the
suitable plant protection measures immediately
The detailed information on pest incidence may also be sent to the directorate through
email ppa@nic.in or appa.ipm-dppqs@.eov.in urgently to apprise the same to Department
of Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare'
Yours faithfully
Encl: as above
(Dr. J.P.Singh)
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy for information:
1. PPS to Joint secretary(PP), DA & FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi- I 10001
2. The Directors of egtir"rt*. of other Soybeau growing states with-the request to keep
close watch on pest"build up & take appropriate measures as indicated above
3. PPS to PPA for information
4. Officer In-charge, CIPMC Indore with directions to conduct regular survey in the area to
ensrile and necessary follow-up with the state authorities.