E-mail: npa.@nic.in
ftffifa/T
ffi ele: 0129241 3985
lh-+glFa* : 0l2g -2412125
.rr
*i.livo. 3-6/2018-19 ilPM-Advisory
URd Tf5'E/Government of India
TR Sti FfrSta 6"?IIuI deTf,q,Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Tfr, Ff+'ffffdl q?i fr'€ffd tuTIUf FfifrffDepartment of Agriculture, Cooperation& Farmers Welfare
Ttr€cfr dTqrsr, d"Rtq q?i d,?r6 frilnaq
DIRECTORATE OF PLANT PROTECTION, QUARANTINE & STORAGE
sflsq 4, Ib..tE[dr{ Gftq]qT )at.H.-IV, FARIDABAD (HARYANA) - I 2 I 00 I
fuianDate:28t0U20I9
To
l. The Director of Agriculture, 2. The Director of Agriculture,
Government of Haryana, Government of Punjab,
Directorate of Agricultu re, Department of Agriculture
Krishi Bhawan, Sector-2l, Kheti Bhawan, Institutional
Panckula-134112 Site No.204
Phase 6, Mohali, Punjab
3. The Director of Agriculture,
Directorate of Agriculture, 4. The Director of Agriculture,
Government of Uttar Directorate of Agriculture,
Pradesh. Krishi Bhawan, Boileauganj
Madan Mohan Malviya Shimla-171005, Himachal
Marg, Pradesh
Krishi Bhawan, Lucknow-
22600r
6.
The Director of Agriculture, The Director of Agriculture,
Directorate of Agriculture Directorate of Agriculture,
(Uttarakhand) Agriculture Department,
Gole Pully, Talab Tillo,
Krishi Bhawan,
Jammu 180002
Nanda-Ki-Chowki,
Premnagar,
Dehradun-248007,
Uttarakhand.
1 Director of Agriculture,
Department of Agriculture
Pant Krishi Bhawan,
Janpah, C-Scheme
Jaipur-302005, Raj asthan
Sub: - Advisory on yellow rust of wheat (Puccinia striiformis f.sp.tritici) to major wheat growing
areas- reg.
S ir,
I have the honour to bring your kind notice that the incidence of yellow rust in wheat crop has
been noticed by CIPMC-Jalandhar during special surveys conducted in the major wheat growing areas of
Punjab from 20'r' to 25tr' January, 2019.
The crop was found in tillering to panicle initiation stage and the incidence of yellow rust has
been found on variety H.D-3086 inYz acre area in few patches at Anandpur sahib Block and Chamkour
sahib block of Ropar district, Punjab. The disease is still at early stage and recorded only in 2 hot spots.
Due to prevailing favourable weather conditions it may further spread/flare up in other wheat
growing areas. Therefore, strong linkage among state agriculture department, State Agriculture
Universities, ICAR Institutes and farmers is needed, to implement integrated pest management practices
at village level. The following practices of IPM may be followed for management of yellow rust in wheat
crop:
lj
Collect and destroy infested crop debris.
2.
Avoid water logging in the field.
3. Use fertilizers judiciously, farmers may be advised to avoid excess application of Nitrogen fertilizers.
4.
Maintain field sanitation.
5.
Regular training programme for the extension workers, pesticide dealers and farmers should be
organized by the SAUs/ICAR Institutes/CIPMCsIKVKs for up- gradation of their knowledge and skill
regarding management of yellow rust disease.
6.
Fungicides must be used as per label claim approved by the Central Insecticides Board and
Registration Committee. Detailed information is available at http://cibrc.nic.inlmup.htm. However, list
of recommended fungicides for yellow rust is attached herewith as (Annexure-I)
.
7 IPM package of practices for Wheat need to be adopted. This may be downloaded from web-link
http://ppqs.gov.inlipmpakpra:revised.htm or http://farmer.gov.inllPMpackageofpractices.htm.
In view of the above, it is advised that wheat growing areas to be monitored on regular basis and
if any fuither incidence of yellow rust is reported by the farmers, extension functionaries and even
through the newspapers or through any other sources, survey of the affected area may be conducted
immediately and the concemed officials at the Division/District/Bock may be advised to take the
suitable plant protection measures immediately. The detailed information may also be sent to this
Directorate through Fax Q.Jos. 0129-2412125 or 01I-23384182) or e-mail: ppa@nic.in or appa.ipm-
ppqs@gov.in urgently to apprise the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare.
Yours faithfullv.
,!
rnu:"#r,#/"
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy to:
1. Joint Secretary(PP), DAC&FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
2.
Agriculture Commissioner, DAC&FW, Room No.231, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
3.
PS to PPA
4.
Officer I/C of CIPMC- Jalandhar, Faridabad, Lucknow, Solan, Dehradun, Jammu,
Sriganganagar& Jaipur
5.
IT-Cell for uploading on DPPQ&S, website
(Annexure-1)
APPROVED USES OF REGISTERED FUNGICIDES FOR
YELLOW RUST OF WHEAT