Phone : 0129-24 13 985
E-mail -appa. ipm-ppqs@gov. in
:
F.No 3-6l2022-23llPM/Advisorv
TTI{tR|-CFIV Government of India
TR qdfrqrt +-ecm riTrq-q / Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
FR q* frff{ +eqrur RwFr / Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
T;r€qR rttfiur, {rrta qnf ffi?srr{q / Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage
\r{F4, q;fr-fl-{rEtEftql-qr) - l2l 001/ NH-IV, Faridabad (Haryana) - t2l 001
Dated: 14.02.2023
To:
The Directors of Agriculture,
Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Rajasthan
Sub: Advisory on yellow rust of wheat (Puccinia striiformis f.sp. tritici) to major wheat growing
areas-reg.
Sir.
This is to bring to your notice that the incidence of yellow rust has been reported from
Rupnagar and Hoshiarpur districts of Punjab state during regular surveys conducted by CIPMC
Jalandhar. Though the intensity of infestation was found trace (0.5- 1%) but keeping in view of the
congenial climatic conditions (i.e, warm and humid) for rapid building up of yellow rust inoculums,
wheat crop should be monitored regularly for disease build up and adoption of Integrated disease
Management techniques.
Yellow rust or Stripe rust is a disease of Wheat caused by a fungal pathogen, Puccinia
striiform.is. The disease appears in the form of yellow Stripes on wheat leaves. This disease appears if
cold temperature coupled with intermittent rains. The disease mainly attacks in the wheat growing areas
of Punjab, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir and tarai regions of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand.
The first sign of stripe rust is the appearance of yellow streaks (pre-pustules), followed by
small, bright yellow, and elongated uredial pustules arranged in conspicuous rows on the leaves, leaf
sheaths, glumes and awns.
In order to control this disease from becoming an epidemic the following practices of
IPM strategies may be followed for the management of Yellow Rust in wheat crop:
l.
Collect and destroy crop debris/infested plants and maintain field sanitation.
2.
Farmers should be advised to avoid excess application of nitrogenous fertilizers.
3. Organizing of regular training programme for the extension workers, pesticide dealers and
farmers by the SAUs/ICAR Institutes/CIPMCs/KVKs for up- gradation of their knowledge and
skill regarding management of yellow rust disease.
4.
Mobilization of extension functionaries for regular monitoring of pests status.
Contd on page 2.
2
5. Special care must be taken by state functionaries while doing survey for carrying rust infected
leaves samples fiom field to other places because it may act as source of inoculums for other
field. If required infected leave sample must be caried in plastic baglclosed container and such
sample should be destroyed after analysis. Also precautions should be taken while doing survey
that rust spores should not be attached to clothes before moving to other fields.
6. Fungicides must be used as per label claim approved by Registration Committee. Detailed
information is available at
l
Leaflet on Rust of wheat is prepared by DPPQS and uploadld on website and this can be
downloaded from web-link
8 IPM package of practices for Wheat need to be adopted. This may be downloaded from web-
link
or
In view of the above, it is advised that wheat growing areas to be monitored on regular basis
and if any incidence of yellow rust is reported by the farmers, extension functionaries and even through
the newspapers or through any other sources, survey of the affected arca may be conducted and the
concerned officials at the Division/District/Block may be advised to take the suitable plant protection
if
measures required. The detailed information may also be sent to this Directorate through e-mail:
appa.ipm-ppqs@gov.in urgently to apprise the same to the Departrnent of Agriculture & Farmers
Welfare.
Yours faithfullv
Encl: as above
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy for information:
1.
PPS to Joint Secretary @P), DA & FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi- I 0001
1
2.
The Director of Agriculture of other Wheat growing states with the request to keep close
watch on pest build up and take appropriate measures as mentioned above.
3.
PPS to PPA for information.
4. Officer-in-charges all CIPMCs of Wheat growing states with a direction to conduct
regular survey in their areas to ascertain yellow rust incidence level and necessary follow-
up with the state authorities.