Phone:0129-2476370
aq- +-ar{ sa=gat *t rir* F.No3 -6120 19 -20 - IPM- AdvisorY
efl|f,{{fiR/ Government of India
Offil-n-*<.qfrf"i?Tilq-/ Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
TR'@DepartmentofAgriculture.Cooperation&FarmersWelfare
qa€qF:H{ailT, ffiq !rd' wr6 Hdqnaq, \rfl(rE 4, St-drdrd (dtrqrwy
DIRECTORATEoFPLANTPROTECTION'QUARANTINE&STORAGE
(HARYANA) l2l00l
N.H.-lV. FAzuDABAD
Dated:
1212020
To,
The Director of Agdculture
Directorate of Agriculture
Government of Uttar Pradesh
Madan Mohan MalviYa Marg
Krishi Bhavan, Lucknow
-22600I
Subject: Advisory on false Smut of rice caused by (lstiloginoideu virens- regarding
Dear Sir,
This has come to the knowledge of the Directorate that False Smut in rice commonly
known as Kandwa Disease of Rice was reported in Santkabir, Basti, Siddhartha Nagar,
Gorakhpur, Maharajganj, Kushinagar, Devart'a and Ayodhya district of U'P in the year 2020-
21. It is imperative to conduct sensitization ploglalnme among farmers for management of
false smut of Rice to avoid re-occulrence of disease in next rice growing Season' As primary
source of inoculums for false smut is soil, altemate host or contaminated seed, so it is highly
desirable to ensure inclusion of topics on management of false smut of rice in Famiers Field
School GFS) and other farmers training plogrammes conducted by state agriculture
deparlment of the ongoing season also and necessaly preparation for management of disease
during ensuing rice growing season.
Further, it is requested that whenever FFS and other training programmes are being
conducted by the State Agriculture Department may kindly be brought to the knowledge of
RCIPMC. Lucknow.
Contd..l2.,.
a
-L-
An advisory on the management of false smut is enclosed herewith for readY
reference as Annexure-I.
Yours faithfrrlly,
Dr. Ravi Prakash
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy to:
l. Officers I/C of CIPMCs, Lucknougo keep close watch on the irrci&rcefalse smut in
rice and be in touch with the state 6ven ment for follow up action.
2. PS to JS (PP), DAC&FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi for kind information'
3. IT- Cell for uploading on DPPQ&S, website.
Annexure-I
Advisory on the management of false smut of rice
(Causal organism: Fungi- Ustiloginoidea virens)
False smut of rice was reported in Santkabir, Basti, Siddhartha Nagar, Gorakhpur,
Maharajganj, Kushinagar, Devaria and Ayodhya district of U.P in the year 2019-20 in
significant level, therefore, has potential to cause significant damage in 2021-22 Kharif
season also in the above mentioned area and may further spread in other rice growing areas
of states under favorable weather conditions. The disease occur in areas with high relative
humidity (>90%) and temperature ranging from 25−35 ºC. Rain, high humidity, and soils
with high nitrogen content also favors disease development & wind can spread the fungal
spores from plant to plant. Primary source of inoculums is soil, alternate host or
contaminated seeds.
Keeping in view of the above, it is advised that the all rice growing areas of Uttar
Pradesh states may be intensively monitored during Rapid Roving Survey. Strong linkage
among State Agriculture Department, State Agricultural University, ICAR Institutes and
farmers to implement Integrated Pest Management (IPM) at village level need to be
developed. The following practices of IPM strategies may be followed for management of
false smut on Rice crop
Symptoms
False smut is visible only after panicle exertion. It can infect the plant during
flowering stage. Plants infected with false smut have individual rice grain transformed into a
mass of spore balls. These spore balls are initially orange, and then turn into greenish black
when these mature. In most cases, only few grains in a panicle are usually infected and the
rest are normal.
Orange coloured spore ball Mature black spore balls
Disease Cycle and Epidemiology
The disease can occur in areas with high relative humidity (>90%), temperature
ranging from 25−35 ºC and moderate rainfall well distributed during the period of flowering.
Soil with high nitrogen content also favors disease development. Wind can spread the fungal
spores from plant to plant.
Nursery/seedling stage to transplanting stage
 Keep the field clean, remove infected seeds, panicles, plant debris after harvest and
removal of alternate host.
 Crop rotation with non host crops, it provides a mechanism that separates viable
spores in crop residue from the newly emerging seedlings
 Use high quality disease free certified seeds. Seeds contaminated with fungal spore
may serve as inoculum for further spread and development.
 Early planted crop has less smut ball than the late planted crop
 Hot water treatment of seeds at 520C for 10 mins
 Treat the seeds with Pseudomonas fluorescence 10g/lit of water for 30 minutes or
Trichoderma viridae @5-10 g/kg of seeds gives protection soil borne and seed
borne diseases.
 Dip the seedlings in with Pseudomonas fluorescence 5g/lit of water for 20 minutes
before transplanting. Pseudomonas suppresses the diseases and also acts as plant
growth promotion and reduces the severity of many diseases.
 Apply neem cake @150 kg/ha
Vegetative to panicle initiation stage:
 Regular monitoring of disease incidence is very essential to take necessary
proactive measures
 Balanced use of fertilizers and micro-nutrients as per local recommendations.
Reduce humidity levels through alternate wetting and drying of fields rather than
permanently flooding the fields.
 Foliar spray with Pseudomonas fluorescence 5g/lit of water at an interval of 15-20
days after transplanting
 Spray recommended fungicides only after the observation of initial infection of the
disease
Flowering to harvest stage
 Regular monitoring of disease incidence
 At the time of harvesting diseases plants should be removed and destroyed, so that
sclerotia do not fall in the field. This will reduce the primary inoculum for the
next season.
 Spray recommended need based fungicides only after the observation of initial
infection of the disease
 Foliar spray with Pseudomonas fluorescence 5g/lit of water at an interval of 15-20 days
after transplanting.
 Spray with recommended fungicides having lesser waiting period
List fungicides approved against false smut of paddy
Fungicides Dosage per ha Waiting
period from
a.i (g) Formulatio Dilution
last
n (g/ml)% in water
application
(L)
to harvest
(in days)
Copper Hydroxide 53.8% 525 1500 500 10
Copper Hydroxide 77%WP 1000 gm 2000 gm 750 -
Fluopyram 17.7% + Fluopyram1 550 g/ha 500 22
Tebuconazole 17.7%w/w 10
SC +Tebconazo
le110
Picoxystrobin 7.05% + 200 1000 500 24
Propiconazole 11.7% SC
Tebuconazole 50% + - 350-400 500 35
Trifloxystrobin 25% WG