locust@.nic.in Telephone: 0129 -247 635 5
F. No.6-21201 l-12llocust
s{TtiT 5(6R
Govemment of India
gfrEi ftrvn w-eu lzrca
Ministry of Agriculture& Farmers Welfare
(ER, r-c€rft-dr qd fu{rr q-anur frrrm)
(Deparlment of Agriculture" Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
dqtrr q?i,ia-O Fi?raq
E-a-+qfr drarur,
Directorate ofPlant Protection, Quarantine & Storage
(rfr (fg - 8, rFtrq]tlrq- ??!oot
NHIV, Faridabad-121001
Dated: 31.05 2019
Advisory
Subject: Conduct regular survey in the areas wher€ recent Locust incursion was observed in
Jaisalmer district of Rajasthan -regarding
'
In charge, LWO, Jodhpur is aware about recent locust incursion in various areas/villages under
pohkran, Loharki, Khudi, Sam, Kotdi, Fatehgarh, Mokal, Jawahar Nagar tehsils/areas of Jaisalmer
disirict. Considering the fact that during this incursjon the locust population comprising of transient
yellow copulating individuals and adults in large numbers, there is a possibility of laying eggs in these
areas prior to the locust swarms were detected and controlled. The incubation period of locust eggs is
10-12 days hence it is important to keep close watch on eggs hatching alter l0days and take needful
action ifnymphal population is observed. Such efforis will help in seizing the possibility of further locust
upsurge and breeding in these areas. Similar efforts should also be made in the new areas where locust
incursion takes place.
All survey teams of LCOs, field functionaries of the State Government and other stakeholders
may be advised to keep ilose watch on nymphal population and inform to the nearest locust field rjnits for
measures.
taking necessary control
6>
r{:-<
(Dt. J. P Singh)
Joint Director (E)
fo
lncharge, LWO, Jodhpur
Copy for information to:
1. The Director ofAgriculture, Department of Agriculture, Government of Rajasthan, Jaipur
2. loint Director (PP) (l{odal Point for Locust in Rajasthan), Department of Agriculture,
Government of Rajasthan, JaiPur
3. District Collectors: Jodhpur, Jalore, Bikaner, Jaisalmer, Barmer, Nagaur, Churu,
Sriganganagar
4. PPS to Joint Secretary (PP), DAC&FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
t9'^
5. PS to Plant Protection Advisor, Directorate of PPQ&S, Faridabad
6.
Guard file
(Dr. J. P Singh)
Joint Director (E)