E-mail: ppa@,nic.in
tfffd/Tele : 01292 413 98 5
*-+Wnax: 01 29-2412125
ttrI TI./No . 3 -6 12018- 1 gilPM-Advis o ry
flf{iT Stz5R/Government of India
TR q.i F"gm qqlut dT|.tq /M i n i stry of Agri cu ltu re & Farnrers We I fare
Tft, T(-fi"rkf,r qd'fiF.grd qqM hamynepartment of Agriculture, Cooperatiorr& Fanne rs We lfare
ffi€qfr stqilur. TirRltr (r{:+16 heaTranr
DIRECTORATII OF PLANT PROI'I1CTION, QUARANTINII & S'fORAGll
(rd(rE 4, q-ttflqr{ Gft-qFryr )N.H.-tv, FARIDABAD (HARYANA) - l2l00 t
Edi6/Dat":
To
The Director
Di recto rate of A gricultu re
Govt. of Tamil Nadu
Chennai-600005
Sub: Current status of Rugose Spiraling Whitefly (RSW), Aleurodicus rugioperculutus
Martin'on Coconut -Advisory' reg.
Sir,
I wish to bring your kind notice that incidence of invasive and destructivc pcst, Rugose
Spiralling ';Vhitefly (RSW), Aleurodicus rugioperculatus Martin on Coconut has been reported
in above ETL (Economic Threshold Level) at Coimbatore, Ilrode and Tiruppur districts of
Tamil Nadu. It's incidence may further spread to other Coconut growing areas if favourable
weather conditions continue to prevail.
Keeping in view of the severity of the pest, it is advised that all Coconut growing areas
of Tamil Nadu state may be intensively monitored during Rapid Roving Survey for assessment
of population of RSW. Therefiore, strong linkage among Statc Agriculture Department, State
Agricultural University, ICAR Institutes and farmers to implement Intcgrated Pest
Management (IPM) at village level need to be developed.
The follo.' tng IPVI strategies may be adopted for manag,ement of Rugose Spiralling
Whitefly (RSW) on Coconut:
1. Install yellow sticky traps in the orchards to trap adult whitcllics.
2.
Encourage build up clf parasitoid(Encarsia sp.)in the orchards and re-introduce parasitized
pupae in the whitefly infested orchards
3.
Conserve and augment predators of RSW such as Crysoperla and, Coccinetticls which are
available in the field.
4. Apply 7 oh starch stilution on leaflets to flakc out the sooty nroulds.
5. In severe cases, spray only neem oil 0.5% or NSKJi. 5V6 arcl avoid spraying any forrn of
insecticides.
6. Itegular training programme for the extension workers and farmers should be organized by
SAUs/ICAR institutes/ClPMCs/ KVKs for up-gradation of their knowledge and skill
RSW
regarding management of
7. Regular survey and surveillance should bee ccnonnrdrurccfteedd f fo o r r m onitoring thre incidence of Rsw.
g. Sensitization and awareness programmes should be conducted to farmers and other
stakeholders regarding IPM management strategies of RSW'
g. Assessment of the population of RSW should be worked out and extent of damage should be
determined to advice farmers accordingly for the effective management measures.
In view of the above, it is advised that, the affected areas of Coimbatore, Erode and
Tiruppur districts of Tamil Nadu should be monitored for RSW in coconut orchards on
,^.grrlu'. basis and if more incidence of Rugose Spiralling Whitefly is noticed by the farmers,
extension functionaries ancl even througtt tft. newspapers or other source, survey of the
affected area may be conducted immediately and the concerried officials at the
DivisiorvDistrict/Block may be advised to take suitable plant protection measures
immediately. The detailed status report may be sent to thi ax (Nos'
0129-2412125 or 0ll-23384182) or e-mail: ppa@,nic.in or urgently
to apprise Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare.
Yours faithfully,
/tt
Raj
(Sh.
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy to:
1. Joint Secretary (PP), DAC&FW, Krishi Bhawan. New Delhi.
2. Agriculture Commisstoner, Room No. 231, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi'
3. PS to PPA.
4. C)fficers I/C of ClpMCs-'frichy is instructedto keep close watch onthe population of RSW
ancl be in touch with the State Agriculture Department for follow up action.
5. IT- Cell for uploading on DPPQ&S, website'