E-mail: ppa@nic.in
ffi tfistdrugrcz
0r2y2413985
lbwlFax:
0t2g-2tt2t}s
.**
tl=l-€./f.{o. 3 - 6 I 2 0 19 -2 DIIPM-Adviso ry
gf{tf$trFR/Govern
ment of India
@/Ministry of Agriculture & FarmersWelfare
9n'epartmentofAgriculture,Cooperation&FarmersWe|fare
ilf,rqfu iTerur,:irnil?rqii':irr6Pdtenfiq
DIRECTORATE OF'PLANT PROTECTION, QUARANTINE & STORAGE
gd(IE[4,S-TIilfl
ECftqFTD/N.fI.-ry,FARIDABAD(HARYANA)-121OOr
ftai67pu1"-.pto4/2019
To 45
1 Director of Agriculture, 2. The Director
Department of Agriculture, Directorate of Agriculture
Government of Karnataka, Govt. of Tamil Nadu
No.1 Seshadri Road, Chennai-600005, Tamil Nadu
Bengaluru-560001,
Karnataka
Agricultural Production Commissioner, 4. Commissioner and Agriculture Director
Department of Agriculture Department of Agriculture,
Department and Farmers Welfare, Government of Andhra pradesh.
Vikas Bhawan, Old Mirchyard,
Thiruvananthapuram-695033 Nallapadu Road Round up
Kerala Guntur-522004, Andhra pradesh
5. Agriculture Commissioner & Director
Ground Floor, D-block
Fathe Midan, Basheer Bagh
Near Nizam College
Basheer Bagh, Hyderabad
Sub:
Current status of Rugose Spiraling Whitefly (RSW), Aleurodicus rugioperculatzs Martin on
Coconut and Oil Palm-Advisory reg.
Sir,
i
wish to bring your kind notice that incidence of invasive and destructive pest, Rugose
Spiraling Whitefly (RSW), Aleurodicus rugioperculatus Martin on Coconut has been reported above
ETL (Economic Threshold Level) in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Telansana.
As per the report of joint survey conducted by ICAR- Indian institute of Oil palm Research
(IIOPR), DAC&FW, State Agriculture Departments of Andhra Pradesh & Telangana and CIpMC-
Vijayawada, which was constituted for survey on incidence of RSW in Oil palm plantations of Andhra
Pradesh and Telangana states, the incidence of RSW is spreading rapidly from Kadiyam mandal to the
surrounding mandals creating a very alarm situation to Oil palm plantations. It is also found that the
secondary host plants like Oil Palm, Banana, Custard apple, and Guava are also more severelv affected
and the pest is spreading to non-host plants.
As per the report six districts, namely West Godavari, East Godavari, Krishna, Srikakulam,
yizianagaram and Vishakhapatnam were severely affected. A total of 10226 ha and II744ha were
damaged in coconut and Oil Palm plantations respectively'
Keeping in vieu'of the severity of the pest, it is advised that all Coconut and Oil Palm growing
areas of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana states may be intensively
monitored during Rapid Roving Survey for assessment of population of RSW. Therefore, strong
linkage among State Agriculture Department, State Agricultural University, ICAR Institutes and
farmers to implement Integrated Pest Management (IPM) at village level need to be developed.
The following IPM strategies may be adopted for management of Rugose Spiralling Whitefly
(RSW) on Coconut and Oil Palm:
1. Install yellow sticky traps in the orchards to trap adult whiteflies.
2. Encourage build-up of parasitoid (Encarsia sp.) in the orchards and re-introduce parasitized
pupae in the whitefly-infested orchards.
3. Conserve and augment predators of RSW such as Chrysoperla and Coccinellids, which are
available in the field.
4. Apply 1 oZ starch solution on leaflets to flake out the sooty mouids.
5. In severe cases, spray only neem oil 0.5% or NSKE 5o/o and avoid spraying any form of
insecticides.
6. Entomopathogenic fungus Isari fumosorosea has been found to be effective in managing
RSW, hence Processing companies, SAUs, ICAR institutes, KVKs, CIPMCs and State
Agricultural Departments of respective states should mass multiply it in large scale for
making available to the needy farmers.
7. Regular training programme for the extension workers and farmers should be organized by
SAUs/ICAR institutes/ClPMCs/ KVKs for up-gradation of their knowledge and skill
regarding management of RSW
8. Regular suwey and surveillance should be conducted for monitoring the incidence of RSW.
g. Sensitization and awareness programmes should be conducted to farmers and other
stakeholders regarding IPM management strategies of RSW.
10. Assessment of the population of RSW should be worked out and extent of damage should be
determined to advice farmers accordingly for the effective management measures'
In view of the above, it is advised that the affected areas of Mysore and Mandya districts of
Karnataka, Pallathur, Karambakudi and Pattukottai villages in Thanjavur District of Tamil Nadu and
West Godavari, East Godavari, Krishna, Srikakulam,Yrzianaguam and Vishakhapatnam districts of
Andhra pradesh should be monitored for RSW in Coconut and Oil Palm orchards on regular basis and
if more incidence of Rugose Spiraling Whitefly is noticed by the farmers, extension functionaries and
even through the newspapers or other source, survey of the affected area may be conducted
immediately and the concerned officials at the Division/DistrictiBlock may be advised to take suitable
plant protection measures immediately. The detailed status report may be sent to this Directorate
through Fax (Nos. 0129-2412125 or 011-23384182) or e-mail: ppa@nic.in or appa.ipm-ppqs@.gov.in
urgently to apprise Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare.
Yours faithfullv.
ll
rsn.*#ffi/n
Dlonf Drnfanf.inn A drriser
Copy to:
1. Joint Secretary (PP), DAC&FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi'
2. Agriculture Commissioner, Room No. 231, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
3. PS to PPA.
4. Officers I/C of ClPMCs-Bengaluru, Trichy, Ernakulum, Vijayawada and Hyderabad are
instructed to keep close watch on the population of RSW and be in touch with the State
Agriculture Department for follow up action.
5. IT- Cell for uploading on DPPQ&S, website.