ffi
ffi
Email:.locust@nic.in Riq qqa Telephone : 0 129 -247 63 5 4
F. No.6-2l201 1 - I 2/Locust
ETRtt TT{i['R
Government of India
gfrfrfusmir-ertw riTrflq
Ministry of Agriculture& Farmers Welfare
(gR, ue*rRar qi frqrr qqrur Fcqrrr)
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
ffi€qF rirapr, drr0q ('d Tiff6 fitBrorq
Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage
IFT(nr - U,$trEtqK- ??TOO?
NH-IV. Faridabad-l 2100 1
Date:DB 10512019
To,
The Director of Agriculture,
Government of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana & Punjab
Subject: Preparedness for Locust control during the summer/ monsoon season of
2019-regarding.
Sir,
You are well aware that Desert Locust population persists in the Hom of Africa, the
Arabian Peninsula and in South West Asia. Considering the very latest Desert Locust situation
updated by Food & Agriculture Organisation (FAO) through Locust Watch
(www.fao.ore/agllocusts) and expected developments as well as summarising the situation of last
month and the six-week forecast in the monthly FAO Desert Locust Bulletin No. 487, it is
important specifically for above western states of India in the coming months in relation to the
important locust situation underway in the spring breeding areas of Iran and Pakistan. This year
spring breeding in southern Iran and southwest Pakistan is unusually heary, especially in Iran
where infestations are widely distributed beyond the traditional southeast and substantial aerial
and ground control operations are in progress against locust groups, hopper bands and a few
swanns. Despite these efforts and because of the difficult nature of Desert Locust survey and
control, spring breeding will continue during May and probably into June, causing locust
numbers to increase further. As vegetation dries out, locusts will concentrate and could form
small hopper bands and adult swarrns. Another generation of spring breeding in Iran and
Pakistan is not expected; instead, the adult groups and small swarms that form are more likely to
move towards the summer breeding areas along both sides of the Indo-Pakistan border, including
Rajasthan and Gujarat, to meet the monsoon rains for summer breeding from July onwards.
Contd...pl2
-2-
Locusts could start to arrive in India as early as about mid-June in advance of the
monsoon rains. The scale of this movement depends on spring breeding and the success of
survey and control operations during May and June in Iran and Pakistan.
We are also watching the developing situation in Yemen in case spring breeding gives
rise to swaffns in June/July that could move to India if ecological conditions do not remain
favourable in Yemen and will provide ample warning in advance of any threat.
Considering the above situation and wind direction towards SDA, there is a risk of
adult swarms incursion in to Indian bordering districts of Scheduled Desert Area of Rajasthan
and Gujarat States as well as bordering areas of Punjab and Haryana which may pose a potential
threat to the crops during kharif season. Due to the possibility of favourable ecological
conditions during May/June in Pakistan as well as in certain parts of SDA of Rajasthan and
Gujarat, it may be favourable for locust breeding.
;.. Depending upon favourable ecological conditions, the existing population and its
subsequent development, if not controlled in Pakistan, Iran and Yemen, there is a chance of
locust swann invasion in to SDA of Rajasthan and Gujarat and bordering areas of Punjab and
Haryana. The various field functionaries of Locust Warning Oraganisation (LWO) have been
alerted to keep continuous and constant watch/ vigilance and to conduct locust surveys in the
Thar Desert of India. LWO has been fully geared-up to face any locust emergency situation.
It is, therefore, requested to activate your field functionaries to conduct locust surveys in
the respective areas and intimate/liaise to the nearest Locust Circle Office (LCOy LWO, Jodhpur
under intimation to this Directorate for rebuffing the locust attack effectively. Your assistance in
the form of manpower and other logistics is highly solicited, in case locust emergency occurs on
laree scale.
Yours faithfully,
rn"i.,#rh
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy to:
1. Officer In Charge, LWO, Jodhpur, LCO, Bikaner, Bhuj, Barmer, Jaisalmer, Suratgarh,
Jalore, Phalodi, Nagaur, Churu, Palanpur and FSIL, Bikaner for information and similar.
action. They are advised to monitor the locust situation more closely and carefully and
adopt suitable control measures, if needed. Findings of these surveys should be
communicated to the Directorate. They are also advised to keep close liaisoning with the
concerned State Authorities and Border Security Forces located in the Scheduled Desert
Areas.
2. The Joint Secretary (PP), DAC&FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi