F.No 3-612022-23lIPIWAdvisorv
rrRir1ratV Government of India
TR\r"tfurttn,ettur{?FFT/ Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
TRq+ft{rtq-qrurfurm / Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
qaffidqXq, ffiqq{Itf{ft?{ffffq/ Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage
\r{gq4, s,ft{r{r(GffgrurD - l2l00llNH-IV, Faridabad (Haryana) - 121 001
Date: 19.06.2025
To
The Director of Agriculture,
Government of Punjab,Haryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Kamataka, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana
Sub: Preparatory advisory for timely management of Pink Bollworm (PB!Y) in cotton-reg.
Sir,
. You are aware that the pink bollworm (Pectinophora gossypiella) is the most important cotton
pest in India and its incidence was reported above ETL from various states across the country during past
years. During2024-25 the PBW incidence was recorded above ETL from Punjab, Haryana & Rajasthan
states which necessitated coordination of all stakeholders to create awareness on integrated approach for
effective management of PBW in cotton crop. Keeping in view the ensuing Kharif season the cotton crop
should be monitored regularly for pest build up and adopt Integrated Pest Management techniques.
Important IPM practices for management of PBW are listed at Annexure-I.
Further, it is informed that the Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
had launched Al-driven National Pest Surveillance System (NPSS) application which is designed to
enhance pest surveillance and timely advisory across the nation, providing significant benefits to the
farmers for timely pest management before it reaches ETL. NPSS covers cotton crop under pest
identification and pest surveillance module which provides complete solution for pest management at
farm level.
In view of the above, it is advised to disseminate the above advisory among all extension
functionaries of your State in cotton gowing areas and also advise to monitor cotton crop on regular basis
for incidence of PBW and encourage all field functionaries to record PBW tkough NPSS application.
The detailed information may also be sent to this Directorate through e-mail: appa.ipm-ppqs@eov.in for
further needful action.
Yours sincerelv
Plant Protection Adviser
Copy for information:
l. PPS to Joint Secretary(PP), DA&FW, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi- 110001
2. PPS to PPA for information
a Officer In-charges, all CIPMCs of cotton growing states with a direction to conduct regular
survey in their areas to ascertain the pest incidence level and necessary follow-up with the state
authorities.
{
Annexure-I
Important IPM practices for management of Pink Boll worm (PBIV)
. Timely sowing of Bt-cotton hybrids/ varieties recommended for the region'
. Follow.".o.-"nded spacing of zone and maintain the number of plants as per spacing'
. Do not use ttre trigtrei dose-s of nitrogenous (urea) fertilizer to avoid over growth of
plants'
. Install pheromone traps near glnnerlels and Cotton stack of stalk in field to trap adult male
tnoth, if anY.
. Avoid pre-season sowing of cotton crop as it would be susceptible to pink bollworm'
. Fields that have sufferei heavy damage due to pink bollworm last year may be closely
monitored during the current season'
. Monitoring of pink bollworm using pheromone traps may be initiated at 45 days after
sowing. Install Pheromone traPs @ d per hectare fbr monitoring moth activity of pink
bollworm.
. Use PB rope (>140 mg of a.i /dispenser &. 9875 dispensers to be used for 25 ha of area)
moths
tot the control of adult male
. includes Parasitoids-
( tis chlorideae (lawal)'
r beetles, Reduviid bug
ased directly or Tricho-card can be pinned to
fields at the rate of 1.0 lakh adultslha @ I0
days interval for destroying the egg stage of PBW'
. Use of neem based p".ti"iA.s tjfg CnC approved) in the initial stage of the pest for
augmentation and conservation of potential naiural enemies. The list of Bio-insecticides
are available on https://ppqs.gov.in/divisions lcib-rclmaior-uses-of-pesticides
. Inspect the crop ut'tquuti,tg -and flowering stage of the crop for the presence of pink
boiworm larvae within flowirs. Remove and destroy rosette flowers whenever seen'
. At boll formation stage, farmers are advised to inspect cotton crop for presence and
damage of pink bolliorm by plucking and dissecting 20 green bolls per acre from
different plants randomlY.
. Economic threshold level (ETL) at flowering stage is l0% damaged flowers (Rosette
flowers) or at boll development stage is10% damaged green bolls (at least two bolls out
of 20 bolls having white oi pink laiaelexit holes), ETL for adults male moths trapped in
pheromone ,.up (Au..ug. of 2 tapslacre) is 8 moths catch per pheromone trap for
consecutive 3 diys. On crossing ETL spraying of recommended insecticides is
advocated.
The list of cIB & RC approved pesticides for management of PBW in cotton is
available on
. Clean up residual stalks and partially opened bolls from fields. Do not stack cotton stalks
in fields to reduce the carryover population.
. Stack cotton stalks away from the field preferably in village and
North zone, stacked cotton stalks retained after 30'n March may be
help of mosquito net or plastic sheets after beating and dislodging t
Destrov the residues /trash.