
OPERATIONALGUIDELINES
RAINFED AREA DEVELOPMENT (RAD) COMPONENT
(RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA)
1. Component:
Rainfed Area Development (RAD) component of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna (RKVY).
General provisions of RKVY Guidelines shall be applicable for the component.
2. Background:
2.1 Sustaining agricultural productivity depends on quality and availability of natural resources like
soil and water. Agricultural growth can be sustained by promoting conservation and sustainable
use of these scarce natural resources through appropriate location specific measures. Indian
agriculture remains predominantly rainfed covering about 50% of the country’s net sown area.
Thus, conservation of natural resources in conjunction with development of rainfed agriculture
holds the key to meet burgeoning demands for food grain in the country. National Mission for
Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has been launched for enhancing agricultural productivity
especially in climatically vulnerable rainfed areas focusing on integrated farming, rain water
management its use efficiency, soil health management and augmneting resource conservation.
2.2 To mainstream development of rainfed areas in a sustainable manner, Rainfed Area
Development (RAD) Scheme was made operational from 2014-15 in the country as a component
of National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA). Rainfed Area Development (RAD)
aims at promoting sustainable agriculture production through adaptation of agricultural climatic
zone wise Integrated Farming System (IFS) models developed by Indian Council of Agriculture
research (ICAR). RAD aims at promoting location specific improved agronomic practices
through soil health management, enhanced rain water use efficiency, judicious use of chemicals,
crop diversification and progressive adoption of crop-livestock-tree farming systems in an
integrated approach.
2.3 RAD will adopt an area based approach for development and conservation of natural resources
along with farming systems. This component has been formulated in a ‘watershed plus
framework’ to explore potential utilization of natural resources base/assets available/created
through watershed development and soil conservation activities/interventions under MGNREGS,
PMKSY-WDC, RKVY, etc. This component will introduce appropriate farming systems by
integrating multiple components of agriculture such as crops, horticulture, livestock and fishery
with agro based income generating secondary agriculture activities and value addition. A cluster
based approach of 20 ha. (contiguous or non contiguous in difficult terrain with a close proximity
in a village/adjoining villages) would be developed to derive noticeable impact of convergence
and encourage local participation and for future replication of the model in larger areas.
Supplementary support from this component will be admissible for gap-filling resource
conservation activities under converging programmes. Farming Systems recommended by ICAR
1
and successful findings of NICRA flag ship project shall also be considered in development of
integrated project plan. Since millets can grow under adverse climatic conditions on marginal
poor soils with little inputs and are resistant or tolerant to drought, pests and diseases, they can
also be part of broader farming strategy to adopt to increasingly harsh growing conditions
brought by climate change, while also reducing over-reliance on more commonly grown crops
with high input use thus fostering more diverse diets and promoting food security and nutrition.
Besides millets, pulses and oilseeds are also climate resilient and to further boost the vegetable
oil production in the country, farming systems that are envisaged to promote are mainly based on
PMO (Pulses, Millets and Oilseeds)
3. Objectives:
a. To undertake location specific and landscape-based approach to dry-land areas to ensure
natural resources conservation and sustainable use, strengthening of agriculture production
systems and livelihood development through integration/convergence of schemes in an area
based approach.
b. To make agriculture more productive, sustainable, remunerative and climate
resilient by promoting location specific Integrated/Composite Farming Systems;
c. To conserve natural resources through appropriate soil and moisture conservation
measures;
d. To develop capacity of farmers and stakeholders in conjunction with other on-
going Missions such as National Food and Nutrition Security Mission, National Initiative for
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) etc., in the domain of climate change adaptation
measures;
e. To improve the productivity of rainfed farming by
mainstreaming rainfed technologies refined under All India Coordinated Research Project on
Dry land Agriculture (AICRPDA-NICRA) and by leveraging
resources/provisions made under other Schemes/Missions like Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), PMKSY-WDC, NFNSM, RKVY,
Krishionati Yojana, SMAE, National Mission on Natural Farming etc.
4. The salient features of Rainfed Area Development are;
a. RAD promotes enhancing soil productivity through crop diversification and crop rotation
increasing soil cover (mulching) periods which is important to enhance organic matter of the
soil.
b. Expanding protective irrigation from rain water source through efficient water management
techniques that is required to secure rainfed crops in times of short interval droughts.
c. Encouraging indigenous seeds with better adaptability while ensuring its quality, diversity
and timely availability for climate resilience.
d. Location specific agronomic innovations while enhancing farmers’ knowledge and
management skills towards developing regenerative integrated farming systems.
2
e. Appropriate small farm mechanization (small machines and implements for women) for
ensuring timely operations and reducing drudgery of woman labour.
f. Development and strengthening of FPOs to deal with multiple and diverse commodities in
small quantities and varied quality.
g. Strengthening support systems for Extensive Livestock Systems (health care, breeding,
drinking water, fodder in commons, etc.)
h. Promote fisheries in rainfed water bodies through institutionalized support systems.
i. Integrated value chain support systems to realize growth potential in pulses, millets and
oilseeds based farming production systems including infrastructure and processing facilities
– focus on local markets.
j. Risk minimization, resilience building and enhancing private investment.
5. Strategy:
To achieve the objectives, RAD will have following multi-pronged strategy:
5.1 Promoting integrated farming system covering crops, livestock and tree plantation (horticulture
and/or agroforestry) based composite farming for enhancing livelihood opportunities, ensuring food
security and minimizing risks from crop failure through supplementary/ residual production
systems;
5.2 Popularizing resource conservation technologies (both on-farm and off-farm) and introducing
practices that will support mitigation efforts in times of extreme climatic events or disasters like
prolonged dry spells, floods etc.
5.3 Promoting effective management of available rain water resources and enhancing water use
efficiency through application of technologies coupled with demand and supply side management
solutions;
5.4 Interventions on Agriculture Extension shall be emphasized upon for capacity building, awareness
generation, information support, pulling resources together through convergence etc. Capacity
building for improved agronomic practices through extension programs for higher farm
productivity, improved soil treatment, increased water holding capacity, judicious use of
chemicals/energy, enhanced soil carbon storage etc. is the key to the success of the program.
5.5 Selection of rain-fed/dry-land areas: State Government shall identify the priority blocks for
undertaking the rainfed area development in an integrated approach. Priority shall be given to the
following areas under the scheme;
i. Gram Panchayat/Blocks having more than 60% of the area under uplands/rain-fed.
ii. Natural Farming Clusters.
3
iii. Watersheds area taken up under WDC project in last 20 yrs shall be given preference.
iv. Gram Panchayat/Blocks which are the focus areas of NRLM.
v. Aspirational blocks selected by NITI Aayog.
vi. Districts and Blocks selected under NFSM Pulse/Oilseeds/Millets.
5.6 Millets perform exceptionally well in rainfed areas due to its hardiness and capacity to withstand
climatic aberration. Cultivation of millets shall be preferred in RAD thus contributing to
Government's strategy to promote millets. Cluster approach in a village or an area of not less than
20 ha. to be adopted to utilize the potential of available/created common resources. At least 25%
area of the cluster shall be taken up for Millets cultivation.
5.7 RAD system increases carbon storage potential due to multiple plant species and enhances green
coverage in agricultural lands. Carbon sequestration potential in RAD system is generally greater
than that of single cropped based system. RAD thus contributes to the increasing the scope for
emerging carbon market.
5.8 Involving knowledge institutions and professionals in developing climate change adaptation and
mitigation strategies for specific agro climatic situations and promoting them through appropriate
farming systems. Recommendations of ICAR’s Contingency Plans and technologies developed
under NICRA project on climate resilient farming shall also be integrated in the project plan.
5.9 Programmatic interventions as per land capability and conducive to climatic parameters for
ensuring integrated development through dissemination and adoption of rainfed technologies with
greater reach in disadvantaged areas & location specific planning by way of coordination,
convergence and leveraging investments from other Schemes/Missions like MGNREGS, PMKSY,
RKVY, National Food and Nutrition Security Mission(NFNSM), Mission for Integrated
Development of Horticulture (MIDH), Sub Mission on Agricultural Extension (SMAE) etc. A
consortium approach would be evolved with various stake holders including knowledge partners
like State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR) institutes, other professional/academic organizations like DST, DBT
etc. to provide single window service/knowledge provider system for the benefit of farming
community.
5.10 State Government may involve additional field level Community Resource Persons as per the
requirement in the implementation of the program. Efforts should be made to make optimum
utilization of field cadre of SRLM, NF program, BTM/ATM under ATMA. State Govt. may select
field NGO/Young Professionals to supports programs implemented through Women SHGs/ FPOs.
5.11 Strong technical monitoring and feedback systems on climate change mitigation and adaptation
issues for regular updates on technical feasibility of various components and their effectiveness in
bringing about the climate resilience. The experts of central institutes and state agricultural
4
universities would be part of such technical monitoring/feedback. The capacity building of the
implementing agencies would be steered by MANAGE.
6 Interventions:
6.1 RAD aims at promoting Integrated Farming System (IFS) with emphasis on multi-cropping,
rotational cropping, inter-cropping, mixed-cropping practices with allied activities like horticulture,
livestock, fishery, plantation, apiculture, etc. to enable farmers not only in maximizing the farm
returns for sustaining livelihood, but also to mitigate the impacts of drought, flood or other extreme
weather events which are occurring frequently due to climate change;
6.2 Depending on the type and extent of natural resources/assets/commodities already developed or
supported, location-specific crops, fruits, feed & fodder, livestock, fisheries, apiculture, mushroom,
medicinal & aromatic plantation and related income generating activities would be supported.
Activities like construction of ponds, land treatment, wells, supply of pumps, micro irrigation/other
water saving devices, seed and sapling support etc. would be converged/supplemented to promote
value addition through a sustainable farming system;
6.3 Adoption of a cluster approach in a village or an area of not less than 20. Ha. (contiguous or non-
contiguous in difficult terrain with close proximity, in a village/adjoining villages and at least 25%
area to be covered for Millets cultivation) may be preferred for injecting investments to utilize the
potential of available/created common resources;
6.4 Support will be given to those who wish to add other compatible farming component(s) to their
existing crops/ system. It should have the potential to introduce/merge at least one or more major
components/activities apart from cropping system of the farming systems to qualify for the support.
Support for only cropping system will not be allowed under this component unless it is diversified
from the regular practice to a farming system suitable to that particular ecological conditions
through effective on farm rain water management and soil health care. Farmers would have the
option to choose one or the other combination of farming systems suitable to the specific eco-
system supported through local KVKs, SAUs, ICAR institutes, ICRISAT, ATMA etc., for
maximizing agricultural productivity from the existing natural resource assets;
6.5 Support to each farming family under RAD component will be restricted to financial assistance of
Rs. 30,000/-. The amount of assistance shall be uniform for all farmers irrespective of the size of
their land holding. Credit support, if required, may be arranged to meet the balance. The details of
interventions’ supported under RAD and Format for preparation of AAP are given at Appendix –I
and Appendix –II respectively.
6.6 State Government shall involve additional field level Community Resource Persons in the
implementation of the program. Monitoring and capacity building of the beneficiaries through
Community Resource Persons (CRPs) under SRLM, Self Help Groups, Champion Farmers
5
under NF program etc. shall be taken up. Provision of Rs.10,000/- per cluster has been made for
such field level support.
6.7 Farmland development would be taken up through location specific interventions like resource
conservation, rainwater harvesting, land development in watershed areas, last mile connectivity
etc. Farmers’ Producer Companies/Organizations, Registered Farmers’ Societies, Farmers’
Cooperatives would also be eligible for developing a cluster.
6.8 Converging the upgraded utilities developed through watershed development programs (WDC-
PMKSY)/ NREGA in terms of water harvesting and micro water storages through effective
application and distribution systems like improved conveyance, field channels, pressurized
irrigation, water lifting devices etc. to enhance the potential of farming systems.
6.9 Suitable linkage for agro-processing and Marketing may be established for the cluster.
Possibilities of building post-harvest and market linkage under PPP model may be explored.
7. Convergence:
Convergence of relevant developmental programs in project areas is important for optimal utilization of
resources by establishing an integrated and coordinated system involving different sectors and
institutions. The upgraded utilities developed through watershed development programs (WDC-
PMKSY)/MGNREGA/ other schemes of Ministry of Rural Development in terms of soil and water
conservation and micro water storages can be made use to enhance the potential of farming systems.
Areas/Commodities being developed under National Food and Nutrition Security Mission (NFNSM),
National Mission on Edible Oil-Oilseeds (NMEO-OS), Mission for Integrated Development of
Horticulture (MIDH), National Mission on Natural Farming, Sub Mission on Agricultural Extension
(SMAE) etc. can be supplemented with other interventions under RKVY to make it an Integrated
Farming System facilitating additional livelihood opportunities to farmers. Interventions on Agriculture
Extension shall be appropriately made use for capacity building, awareness generation, information
support, farm mechanization, availability of seeds/planting materials etc.
7.1 Support to RAD through MNREGA:
7.1.1 Under MNREGA mandatory expenditure of at least 60% on the works to be taken up is for
agriculture and allied activities. The scheme provides for various plantation models such as block
plantation, canal side plantation, sericulture, horticulture plantation, boundary plantation, farm
forestry, wasteland plantation, shelter belt trees plantation, coastline plantation, development of
silvipasture grassland etc. There are many line Departments such as the Forest Department,
Agriculture Department, Horticulture Department, Soil Conservation Department, Tribal
Development, Watershed Department etc. that are working as implementing agency under
MNREGS in the States. Every asset/land based intervention is geo-tagged in three stages, stage 1-
before, Stage 2- during and Stage 3 -after completion of work under MNREGA and these assets
would be utilized under RAD for promoting sustainable farming systems.
6
7.1.2. Since MNREGA provides sufficient opportunities for agriculture and allied activities, States/UTs
must be ensured convergence of RAD with MNREGA to augment the impact of the scheme.
Further, as MNREGA has robust monitoring system, monitoring of works at the micro level shall
be carried out by Panchayat institutions through existing mechanism of MNREGA.
7.2 Support to RAD through PMKSY-WDC:
7.2.1 The objectives of Watershed Development Program includes; a) Securing production and farmers’
income against climate variability and its risks of drought spells through diversification of crop
systems & animal husbandry, and varied livelihood portfolios; efficient water harvesting and
retention of rainwater in soil profile; and entitling all project members to ground and surface water
resources for life saving irrigation on equitable basis. b) Improving intensity and productivity of
various crops, livestock, fisheries and biomass production systems through optimal, integrated,
sustainable and efficient use of natural resources in project areas. c) Recognizing the stake of non-
land holding project members, and promoting alternate livelihood opportunities. d) Building an
ecosystem of enterprises for facilitating efficient scales of operations, access to credit, and market
linkages; knowledge sharing; and resource convergence led by vibrant member managed farmers’
institutions.
7.2.2. Convergence of RAD with PMKSY-WDC (Department of Land Resource) shall compliment the
much needed resources for promoting Integrated Farming System. Watershed Development
Projects of MoRD are to improve productive potential of rainfed / degraded land through integrated
watershed management. It strengthens community based local institutions for promotion of
livelihoods. At macro - level, the vision of WDC-PMKSY projects is to accelerate the economic
growth rate of agriculture in the less endowed rainfed areas of the country. Moreover, this is to be
achieved by adopting harmony with ecological principles of development for ensuring sustained
transformation of economy and ecology. The guiding principles are better Economy, Ecology and
Equity in the rainfed regions of the country. At watershed level, the development plan is guided by
the need to achieve higher incomes for farmers, expanded livelihood options for landless, equity in
distribution of benefits, community ownership and management, and ecologically sustainable action
plan.
7.2.3 Similarly, RAD aims at promoting location specific improved agronomic practices through soil
health management, enhanced water use efficiency, crop diversification, progressive adoption of
crop-livestock farming systems and integrated approaches like crop-sericulture, agro-forestry, fish
farming, etc. Therefore, States/UTs must ensure close convergence of Watershed Developments
Programs with RAD. Priority should be given to the areas covered under Watershed projects for
RAD implementation.
7.3. Support to RAD through National Food and Nutrition Security Mission (NFNSM):
NFNSM supports increase in production of food crops including PMO through production and
productivity enhancement in a sustainable manner in the identified Districts of the country,
7
restoring soil fertility and productivity at the individual farm level and enhancing farm level
economy (i.e. farm profits) and post-harvest value addition at farm gate for better price realization
to farmers through efficient market linkage. NFNSM promotes intensive package of practices
(crop production & protection technologies) on compact blocks in cluster approach. This ensures
inclusion of all the farmers in the block irrespective of their size of holding or the social status of
the farmers. Accordingly, latest crop production & protection technologies including quality seeds,
nutrients, plant protection measures, resource conservation technologies, exposure visit of farmers
are promoted in compact blocks in cluster approach. New extension models involving non-
governmental organizations are also adopted for reaching out to the farmers in remote and
inaccessible areas. RAD should be closely supported under NFNSM through various interventions
including extension activities for promotion of PMO based farming systems.
7.4 Support to RAD through National Mission on Natural Farming:
7.4.1 Natural Farming if done effectively enhances restoration of soil fertility and environmental health,
and mitigating and/or reducing greenhouse gas emissions thus aiding to move towards chemical free
agriculture. Natural Farming builds on natural or ecological processes that exist in or around farms.
Under this, soil is always supposed to be covered with organic mulch, which creates humus and
encourages the growth of friendly microorganisms. Farm made bio-cultures named ‘Jeevamrit,
Beejamrit etc.’ are added to the soil instead of any fertilizers to improve microflora of soil.
7.4.2 Extension program is an important component of National Mission on Natural Farming. Under the
Mission, natural farming practitioners shall be identified in consultation with local Gram Panchayat
who are successful natural farmer with their entire land holding under natural farming since last 2-3
years. Such practicing natural farmers are identified as “Champion Farmers”. Selected champion
farmer shall have adequate land for demonstration of natural farming practices, have necessary
facility for monthly trainings on field (like preparation of Bijamrit, Jivamritetc) and have
organizational capacity and good communication skills. In addition, one rural youth belonging to a
family of natural farmer (other than Champion farmer) is identified as “Community Resource
Person (CRP) in consultation with Gram panchayat. Champion Farmer (CF) and Community
Resource Persons (CRPs) lead the natural farming cluster right from Farmer Field School to
registration of farmers, regular meetings, motivating the farmers to join natural farming movement
and support participating farmers in implementation of best natural farming practices, problem
solutions, farm management, certification, collective marketing of their produce etc.
7.4.3 RAD also emphasizes on the principles of natural farming. This requires adequate awareness and
capacity building efforts for farmers. RAD shall be supported by Natural Farming programs
especially on the capacity building of the farming community through Champion Farmers. Priority
should be given to areas taken under Natural Farming while identifying clusters for RAD program in
order to achieve close convergence.
7.5 Support to RAD through Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE):
The Scheme ATMA (Agriculture Technology Management Agency) supports State Extension
Programmes for bringing Extension Reforms across the country and it has now been included as a
Centrally Sponsored component of the Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE). It is now
8
under implementation in 696 districts of 28 States & 5 UTs of the country. Innovative and
restructured institutional arrangements have been made for technology dissemination amongst the
farmers on a pilot tested Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) model at district
level. Under the Scheme, fund is provided to States with an objective to support State Governments
efforts of revitalization of their extension system and making available the latest agricultural
technologies and good agricultural practices to farmers in different thematic areas to increase
agricultural production through various extension activities. As extension initiatives are the key to
success of RAD program, states must ensure that all beneficiaries under RAD shall be covered under
SMAE programs.
8 Rainfed Area Development – NRAA as Knowledge Partner
8.1 National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA), Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare serves as
a knowledge and technology platform for promoting the growth of agriculture and welfare of farmers
in rainfed regions of the country. In this capacity, NRAA is actively engaged with various Ministries
and Departments at the union level, and with the State Governments as well. The focus of such
engagements is always promotion of rainfed agriculture by enabling knowledge-based interventions
and efficient coordination with various agencies, and convergence of different services. The
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) amongst a bouquet of its several
prorammes targeting growth of the country’s agricultural sector including the rainfed area, has
specifically designed ‘Rainfed Area Development’ (RAD) to enhance greater resilience to the
production systems, and promote egalitarian agricultural growth. NRAA with its specific mandate
dedicated to the accelerated growth of the country’s rainfed agriculture can be a useful partner in this
regard.
8.2 In this context, National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) is notified as a ‘Knowledge and Partner’
to the DA&FW in carrying out its flagship programme. Some of the specific mandates of NRAA
vis-a-vis this partnership are as follows:
i) Provide technology and knowledge support including identification of project clusters and
priority areas
ii) Formulate guidelines and operational manuals for promoting integrated farming and
livelihood systems (IFLS)
iii) Serve as a supervising agency and towards this, undertake field visits and coordinate with
state and field implementation agencies
iv) Design and help in adopting a system of ‘Monitoring and Information System (MIS)
v) Undertake capacity building, training and skill development activities for the states and its
implementing agencies
vi) Anchor the process of convergence with IWMP and such other initiatives (projects,
programmes, schemes etc.) that will enhance inter-initiative convergence and yield
synergistic outcome
vii) Provide any other support as is felt necessary from time to time on issues, that emerge as a
result of consultation between concerned Division(s) of the DA&FW and NRAA.
9
9 Monitoring and Evaluation:
9.1 Geo- Tagging of land based interventions: A robust Monitoring and Evaluation mechanism using
modern technology shall be emphasized upon. Monitoring and Evaluation(M&E) mechanism to keep
a tab on project areas/ physical assets created, name of beneficiaries, assistance provided etc. under
RAD would be developed. All land based interventions shall be Geo-tagged through Apps based
monitoring system. Monitoring of works shall be carried out through existing mechanism of
MNREGA/schemes of Ministry of Rural Development also.
9.2 Project based studies and assessment for Soil carbon sequestration, soil organic matter, improvement
in livelihood, productivity enhancement of crop and cropping systems etc. shall also be undertaken.
MIS and periodical assessment using GIS technologies would be adopted for ensuring effective
monitoring of the programme. States will upload approved AAP, Physical and financial progress
under the Scheme should also be updated every month and uploaded in the portal as per Performa
given at Appendix-III. The information on physical and financial achievements under TSP & SCSP
and Women components has to be furnished periodically as Performa given at Appendix-IIIA.
10. Expected Outcome
RAD program shall increase the area covered under Integrated Farming System resulting in
augmenting farmers income. RAD is expected to transform rain-fed agriculture areas which are more
sensitive areas to climatic aberrations into more climate resilient production system through suitable
adaptation and mitigation measures. Integrating farming systems with horticulture, livestock, bee
rearing and fisheries shall provide income security to farmers in time of abnormal climatic condition.
Millets being climate friendly crops, promoting their cultivation through RAD program shall result in
increase in cultivation area and production of millets.
10
Appendix-I
Rain-fed Area Development (RAD) Cost Norms
Sl. Item Practices Proposed Cost Norms
No.
1. Integrated Farming Crops (Millets Crops / Oilseed/ Rs. 30,000/- (thirty
System Pulses/Vegetables/fodder) + Trees thousand) will be
(Horticulture/ Agro Forestry)+ provided to each
Livestock {Milch cows/ Buffaloes farming family for
/small ruminants (10 animals (Sheep or taking up Integrated
Goat or Pigs) / 50 birds (Duck/ Poultry) Farming System as
} given at S. No. 1 and
at least two
2. Fishery (Fingerlings) Units Fisheries in ponds or Rice field
activities given at
S. No. 2 to 5 shall be
included depending
3. Apiculture(Bee One unit per farm under
on the need of farm
Keeping) plantation/Millets/ Crops.
house hold, resource
4. Silage making for Construction of Silo Pit either below available and
increased availability of ground or above ground with provision convergence
green fodder round the of Chaff Cutter and Weighing Balance mechanism
year identified. The
assistance of
Rs.30,000/- shall be
5. Vermicompost Construction of Vermicompost units,
uniform for all
Units/organic input organic input production units and
farmers irrespective
Production unit, green green manuring.
of the size of their
manuring
land holding.
6 Capacity Building Monitoring and capacity building Rs. 10,000/- per
of the beneficiaries through cluster
Community Resource Persons
(CRPs) under SRLM, Self Help
Groups, Champion Farmers under
NF program etc.
7 Admin Cost As per RKVY norms
Note:
(RAD should be complimented by schemes such as WDC-PMKSY, MGNREGA,NFNSM, other
components of RKVY, National Mission on Edible Oil-Oilseeds (NMEO-OS), Mission for Integrated
Development of Horticulture (MIDH), National Mission on Natural Farming, Sub Mission on
Agricultural Extension(SMAE) etc. through convergence.)
11
APPENDIX-II
Format for Annual Action Plan (AAP) of RAD
The AAP format shall be prepared as given below:
Details of Cluster/ Village –
S. Name of Total Area under Cluster Proposed Area under RAD Nos. of Beneficiaries
No Cluster- in Cluster
Implementing Agency:
Total Area proposed for development:
Total Nos. of Cluster: Total Nos. of beneficiaries:
Farming System Area proposed Number of Estimated Assistance
(ha. )/ Nos. Beneficiaries total Cost Sought from
(CS+SS) RAD
Integrated Farming System (ha)
Fishery (fingerlings) Units
Apiculture Unit
Silage Unit
Vermicompost Units/Organic input
production unit, Green Manuring
Capacity Building
Admin Cost
12
APPENDIX-III
Rainfed Area Development (RAD) Progress Reporting Format
Physical Financial
Unit Incurre
Achievement
Sl. Activity (ha/ Approve Achieveme Total d Cost
nos) d Target nt cost per unit
Central State
Total (Rs.)
Share Share
1
Integrated Farming System
(ha)
2
Fishery (Fingerlings)
Units
3 Apiculture Unit
4 Silage Unit
5 Vermicompost Units/
Organic input
production unit, Green
Manuring
6 Capacity Building
7 Admin Cost
Total
APPENDIX-III-A
Progress reporting format for TSP and SCSP component under RAD
A. Physical achievement
Physical Target Physical Achievement
SC ST General SC ST General
Cluster/District
Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female
B. Financial Target
Financial Target Financial Achievement
Cluster/District
SC ST General SC ST General
Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female
C. Average enhancement of farmer’s income:
D. Average enhancement in cropping intensity:
13
