

IS/ISO 9001:2015 Organization
Volume 75, No. 11 NOVEMBER 2025
In This Issue
Presidential Message 2
Guest Editorial 3
Role of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in enhancing soil health and plant resilience 4
Priyanka Chandra, Parul Sundha, Nirmalendu Basak, A. K. Rai and R. K. Yadav
Harnessing genome editing for developing climate-resilient crops 9
Cover I : International Salinity Anita Mann, S. K. Sanwal, Ashwani Kumar, Nitish Ranjan Prakash,
Conference 3.0 Avni Dahiya, Arvind Kumar and R. K. Yadav
Cover I : G(W20E -–C MAAREC-S2,0 2V5a)ranasi 2023
Nature-based solutions with ecosystem services gains for 13
CCoovveerr IIVV :: LFuettu'sr eR oefs tFooroed F aanrdm Alagnridcuslture managing saline waterlogged landscapes in semi-arid regions
R. Banyal and Varun Saini
ADVISORY BOARD
Understanding the adverse effects of salinity on lentil growth: 16
Chairman : Dr Rajbir Singh Mechanisms and responses
Members Vijayata Singh and Jogendra Singh
• Dr Anuradha Agrawal • Dr Ashok Kumar Remote sensing applications in monitoring and management 20
of soil and water pollution
• Dr Amresh Chandra • Dr M Sujatha Krishan Kanahiya, Parul Sundha and D. S. Bundela
• Dr Padmini Swain • Dr V K Singh Mustard and salinity tolerance: A resilient oilseed for the future 23
Archana Watts, Shaswati Sardar, Silky Gandhi, Anshul Watts,
• Ravindra Verma
Pranjal Yadava, Soham Ray and Shivani Nagar
Cut-soiler-preferential shallow subsurface drainage (PSSD): 27
Project Director : Dr Anuradha Agrawal
A novel technique of salinity management with no residue burning
Incharge, English : Dr Anjani Kumar Jha Gajender Yadav, Neha, R. K. Yadav, Govind Prasad, A. K. Rai and Junya Onishi
Editorial Unit
Integrated sustainable farming model for saline and sodic soils 31
Editor : Dr Anu Rahal Rajkumar, Suresh Kumar, Ram Kishor Fagodia, Awtar Singh and Nirmal Singh
Editing Associate : Shareya Improving crop resilience to salinity stress using growth regulators 36
Pooja Gupta Soni, Roohi, Kannoj, Paras kamboj, Sarita Rani, Satpal and Krishan Kumar
Incharge, : Punit Bhasin
Production Unit Combined effects of heavy metal toxicity and salinity on wheat: 40
Challenges and mitigation strategies
For editorial queries contact: Deodate Jose George, Vanita Pandey, Rinki, Mamrutha H M, Mahendra Firoda,
Editor (Indian Farming), Preety Rani, Zeenat Wadhwa, Yogesh Kumar, Mukesh Kumar Singh,
ICAR-DKMA Gopalareddy K and Vanishree Girimalla
011-2584 2828 Extn. 617 An overview of emerging trends in sodicity reclamation and enhanced food production 45
e-mail: editorindfarming@gmail.com Parul Sundha, Nirmalendu Basak, Arvind Kumar Rai, Priyanka Chandra,
Amresh Chaudhary and Rajender Kumar Yadav
For Subscription and Advertisement
contact: Subsurface drainage technology for restoring crop productivity in waterlogged 48
saline soils
Bhupender Dutt Sagar D. Vibhute, Satyendra Kumar, D. S. Bundela, Suresh Kumar, Anil R. Chinchmalatpure,
In-charge, Business Unit, DKMA, ICAR Jitendra Kumar, Bhaskar Narjary, Raj Mukhopadhyay and Aslam L. Pathan
Krishi Anusandhan Bhavan I, Pusa
Commercial vegetable production under protected structures in 52
New Delhi 110 012
saline environments: A promising strategy for livelihood security
Telefax: 011-2584 3657
R. L. Meena, B. L. Meena, Priyanka Chandra, S. K. Sanwal and Bhaskar Narjary
e-mail: bupinder.icar@nic.in,
businessuniticar@gmail.com Use of modern digital techniques for mapping and assessment of salt-affected soils 57
Amresh Chaudhary, Sandeep Kumar, Nirmalendu Basak, Parul Sundha,
Subscription Priyanka Chandra and A. K. Rai
Single Copy : ` 50
Waste wool technology in arid horticulture: Promoting sustainability and 61
Annual : ` 500 (inland) circular economy
: US$ 100 (overseas) Anita Meena, M. K. Jatav, Manpreet Kaur and R. P. Meena
Special issue : ` 200
Indian Farming 1
November 2025
PRESIDENTIAL MESSAGE
SECONDARY salinization and sodification of agricultural land are indeed significant contributors
to unsustainable farming practices. Worldwide, the total area of salt affected soils amounts to 1381
million ha (Mha) which is 10.7% of the total global land area. It has severe impact on the livelihoods
of over 2.6 billion people (about 74% of resource-poor farmers). This issue causes an annual economic
loss of around US$ 6.3 billion. Predictions indicate a further considerable spread of salt-affected soils
in the coming decades, threatening global food security. The largest extent of salt affected area exists
in Australia (357 Mha), Argentina (153 Mha), Kazakhstan (94 Mha), the Russian Federation (77 Mha),
the United States (73.4 Mha), the Islamic Republic of Iran (55.6 Mha), the Sudan (43.6 Mha), Uzbekistan
(40.9 Mha), Afghanistan (38.2 Mha), and China (36 Mha). These ten countries account for 70 percent
of the total salt affected area of the world. In India, 6.73 million hectares are affected by salinity, with
2.95 million hectares of saline land across 16 states. Annual crop production losses due to salinity and
sodicity are estimated at 16.84 million tonnes, amounting to a loss of `2300 (~$27) million. The situation
is expected to further worsen, with projections suggesting that the affected area may increase to 16.2
million hectares by 2050. The primary causes of soil salinization are inadequate drainage systems,
waterlogging, unsustainable farming practices, and the growing use of low-quality groundwater for
irrigation.
The ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (CSSRI), Karnal, Haryana, India, has made
significant contributions to the development of technologies for the reclamation and productive
management of salt-affected soils and waters. The ICAR-CSSRI is one of the world’s leading institutions
fully dedicated to the development of technologies for managing saline lands for agricultural production.
For decades, it has been at the forefront of developing integrated solutions for the management of salt-
affected soils and waters, reaching millions of farmers through effective extension programs. As such,
nearly 2.2 million ha salt affected lands have been reclaimed and put to productive use. It has been
estimated that reclaimed area is contributing more than 15 million tonnes of foodgrains to the national
pool.
The Indian Society of Soil Salinity and Water Quality (ISSSWQ), was founded on 6th August 2008 at
Karnal under the Societies Registration Act XXI, 1860 (Registration No. ROS-088). The society pursues
for the advancement of research and development in soil salinity and water quality, and it aims at
providing a forum for scientists, researchers, students and different stakeholders on the emerging
scientific themes for exchange of ideas and knowledge on sustainable management of salt affected
ecologies. It also acts as a link between research institutions, development organizations, industries,
and farmers. The society has organized two International Salinity Conferences and six National
Conferences/Seminars on the important topical issues. During these events, the society engaged its
members, and domain experts, stakeholders and farmers to deliberate and develop road map for
solving the multifaceted issues of the saline ecosystems.
Rajender Kumar Yadav
President
2 Indian Farming
November 2025
G
uest edITORIAL
Editorial
IN the present era, soil salinity presents a significant and widespread challenge and
implications that affect agricultural production and food security, and biodiversity
conservation and environmental sustainability in arid and semi-arid regions across globe.
Currently, worldwide more than 835 million hectares of land, approximately 20 and 33%
of total and irrigated agricultural land, respectively, is affected by problem of salts. Salt-
affected soils (SAS) comprise of sodic (438 Mha) and saline (397 Mha) soils spread over
more than 100 countries. Out of the total SAS, ~76 Mha area is affected by human-induced
salinization and sodification. The coastal areas are vulnerable to sea water intrusion and
inundation due to the climate change. Intensive and faulty agricultural practices, and long-
term climate shifts are major factors that induce escalating salt stress in soil and crops.
Livelihoods of more than 2.6 billion (about 74%) resource poor peasants is threatened
due to moderate to severe degradation of nearly 52% of the world's agrarian land. This
results in an annual economic loss of ~US $ 6.3 billion. Sustainable land management is vital
for ecological sustainability,mitigate the process of further soil deterioration, and to meet
the national targets of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). India remains committed
to achieving land degradation neutrality and has set target for restoring degraded lands
(26.0 million hectares) by 2030.
The aforesaid challenges underscore the urgent need for sustainable management of salt-
affected lands. Land restoration practices play a crucial role in preventing further expansion
of soil salinization and ensuring food security and wellbeing of agrarian community,
especially in the backdrop of climate change. At ICAR-CSSRI, Karnal, we strive to bring
hope and prosperity to the farmers, inhabiting in salt-affected regions and exemplify our
unwavering dedication to the society. Hence, this issue of Indian Farming addresses the
emerging challenges in salt-affected lands and their sustainable management.
Guest Editors
Priyanka Chandra

Parul Sundha

Gajender Yadav

Arvind Kumar Rai

Rajender Kumar Yadav

Indian Farming 3
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 04-08; November 2025
Role of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in
enhancing soil health and plant resilience
Priyanka Chandra1*, Parul Sundha1, Nirmalendu Basak2,
A. K. Rai1 and R. K. Yadav1
1ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
2ICAR-National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning, Regional Centre, Kolkata 700 064
Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) form symbiotic associations with the roots of most terrestrial
plants and play a pivotal role in maintaining soil health and ecosystem stability. Through their
extensive hyphal networks, AMF enhance plant access to key nutrients particularly phosphorus
and nitrogen while receiving carbohydrates in return, thus, supporting a mutualistic exchange.
Their role in improving soil structure is mediated by glomalin production, which stabilizes soil
aggregates, enhances porosity, and fosters microbial activity. AMF also contribute to organic matter
decomposition and carbon sequestration, further influencing nutrient cycling. Importantly, AMF
have emerged as effective agents for mitigating salinity stress in plants by improving phosphorus
acquisition, reducing sodium uptake, and maintaining optimal K⁺/Na⁺ and Mg²⁺/Na⁺ ratios in plant
tissues. Despite observed genotype-dependent variability in AMF effectiveness, their integration
into sustainable agricultural practices such as reduced tillage, crop rotation, and inoculation offers
a promising strategy for improving soil fertility, minimizing chemical inputs, and enhancing crop
resilience under abiotic stress conditions. Understanding the functional mechanisms of AMF is
thus vital for leveraging their potential in agroecological systems.
Keywords: Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, Carbon sequestration, Crop resilience, Ecosystem stability
ARBUSCULAR Mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) growth and reproduction. This mutualistic exchange
form symbiotic associations with the roots of benefits both partners and contributes to the overall
the majority of terrestrial plants, playing a crucial productivity and resilience of terrestrial ecosystems.
role in shaping soil conditions and influencing soil One of the key contributions of AMF to soil conditions
health. AMF establish intricate networks within the is the enhancement of soil aggregation and structure. By
rhizosphere, facilitating nutrient uptake, improving secreting glomalin, a glycoprotein that acts as a binding
soil structure, and enhancing plant resilience to agent, AMF promote soil aggregation, leading to the
environmental stressors. As such, exploring the effects formation of stable soil aggregates. These aggregates
of AMF on soil conditions and soil health is essential improve soil porosity, water infiltration, and aeration,
for understanding the intricate relationships between creating a favourable environment for root growth
plants, microbes, and their surrounding environment. and microbial activity. Additionally, AMF play a vital
AMF belong to the phylum Glomeromycota and form role in organic matter decomposition, accelerating the
mutualistic relationships with a wide range of plant breakdown of organic residues and contributing to
species, including crops, grasses, and trees. Through soil carbon sequestration. Moreover, AMF influence
these symbiotic associations, AMF extend the reach of soil nutrient cycling and availability, particularly
plant roots, increasing their access to water, nutrients, phosphorus cycling. Through their extensive hyphal
and minerals, particularly phosphorus and nitrogen. networks, AMF scavenge phosphorus from the soil,
In return, plants provide AMF with carbohydrates making it accessible to plants with high phosphorus
synthesized through photosynthesis, sustaining their requirements. This nutrient mobilization not only
4 Indian Farming
November 2025
Description of functioning of AMF in the rhizosphere (Chandra et al. 2025)
benefits mycorrhizal plants but also enhances the the effects of AMF on soil conditions and soil health is
nutrient status of the soil, supporting the growth of essential for optimizing their use in agroecosystems and
associated plants and promoting ecosystem diversity. maximizing their benefits for sustainable agriculture.
As key components of soil-plant ecosystems, AMF
play a crucial role in improving plant responses to Functioning of AMF
salinity, benefiting both growth and yield. This makes • Nutrient uptake: AMF enhance nutrient uptake
AMF valuable candidates for mitigating salt stress by extending the root system's reach into the soil,
through bio-amelioration. The enhanced growth increasing the surface area available for nutrient
observed in mycorrhized salt-stressed plants is largely absorption.
attributed to AM fungi-mediated improvements in • Nitrogen uptake: AMF enhance nitrogen uptake
nutrient acquisition, particularly phosphorus, as Pi plants, particularly in nitrogen-poor soils, through
absorption tends to decline under saline conditions. increased root exploration and nutrient absorption.
AM symbiosis has also been shown to reduce sodium • Phosphorus solubilization: AMF release organic
(Na⁺) uptake and translocation while promoting the acids and phosphatase enzymes into the rhizosphere,
absorption of essential cations such as potassium (K⁺), which solubilize phosphorus from minerals such as
calcium (Ca²⁺), and magnesium (Mg²⁺). This interaction apatite and rock phosphate.
leads to an increase in K⁺/Na⁺ and Mg²⁺/Na⁺ ratios in plant • Induced systemic resistance: Mycorrhizal
shoots, which contributes to improved physiological associations induce systemic resistance in plants,
stability under salt stress. However, significant activating defence mechanisms that enhance plant
variability has been reported in the effectiveness of resilience to pathogen attack.
AM symbiosis in addressing salinity and phosphorus • Disease suppression: AMF protect plant roots
deficiency, depending on the specific plant and AM from infection by soil-borne pathogens, forming
fungi genotypes involved. a physical barrier and enhancing plant defence
In recent years, there has been growing interest in against pathogen invasion.
harnessing the potential of AMF to improve soil health • Water relations: AMF improve water uptake
and agricultural sustainability. By inoculating soils efficiency by accessing water from deeper soil layers
with AMF or adopting practices that promote their and transporting it to the plant host.
proliferation, such as reduced tillage and cover cropping, • Enhanced root exploration: AMF hyphae extend
farmers can enhance soil fertility, reduce nutrient into the soil, accessing micronutrients from mineral
leaching, and reduce the need for chemical fertilizers and sources and soil organic matter.
pesticides. Understanding the mechanisms underlying • Soil structure: By secreting glomalin and
Indian Farming 5
November 2025
promoting soil aggregation, AMF contribute to soil compared to sorghum. Previous studies, have also
structure formation, enhancing soil fertility and indicated that maize facilitates AMF propagation.
plant growth. The higher percentage of root colonization in maize is
• Stress tolerance: AMF enhance plant resilience to largely attributed to the unique composition of its root
environmental stressors such as drought, salinity, exudates. Some flavones, exclusively produced by maize
and nutrient deficiency, through improved nutrient roots, play a significant role in plant-fungal interactions
acquisition and water relations. and symbiotic relationships. These compounds are
• Drought tolerance: AMF enhance plant drought known to attract mycorrhizal germ tubes to the roots,
tolerance by improving water uptake efficiency, potentially enhancing AMF colonization by promoting
regulating stomatal conductance, and enhancing spore germination and germ tube growth. Mycorrhizal
plant osmotic adjustment mechanisms. colonization varies depending on AMF communities,
• Salinity tolerance: Mycorrhizal associations can crop type, variety, and environmental factors such as soil
alleviate salt stress in plants by enhancing ion and climate conditions. The primary factor influencing
homeostasis, facilitating sodium exclusion, and these interactions is the fungal requirement for
promoting osmotic adjustment, thereby improving photoassimilates, which affects both root associations and
plant growth and productivity in saline soils. fungal reproduction. In the second cycle of propogation,
• Heavy metal remediation: AMF contribute to heavy both colonization levels and arbuscule abundance were
metal remediation by immobilizing toxic metals higher than in the first cycle. The extensive root density,
in the soil, facilitating metal uptake by plants, and branching, and spread of sorghum and maize roots
promoting metal detoxification and sequestration in support a broad proliferation of AMF within their root
plant tissues and rhizosphere microorganisms. systems. This facilitates a richer and more diverse fungal
• Carbon sequestration: AMF play a significant role community, increasing the number of infection points
in soil carbon sequestration by enhancing plant and enhancing contact with spores, ultimately leading to
productivity, promoting root biomass accumulation, improved colonization.
and increasing soil organic matter content. Plant growth, and phosphorus status: Plants
inoculated with AMF exhibited significantly improved
Case study in salt affected soils growth compared to control plants in terms of various
Suitable host: Propagation of native AMF by soil growth parameters highlighting the role of AM
trapping method was studied using sorghum and maize colonization in enhancing plant growth and nutrient
as trap crops in two cycles. For the first cycle, both the uptake. The findings further suggested that AMF
crops were grown in pots for 60 days and the plants were exert a positive effect under salt stress conditions.
uprooted and some roots were collected for confirmation AMF inoculation also enhanced P uptake in sorghum
of mycorrhizal associations. For the second cycle, the plants under stressed conditions. AM fungi possessing
roots obtained from first cycle were chopped and mix as specialized phosphorus transporters with high affinity,
inoculum in the same pots. Sorghum and maize seeds which help solubilize P under moderate and severe
were sown in the same pots. Again after 2 months, the salinity conditions and when P availability is low.
plants were uprooted and roots were examined for These fungi achieve this by producing organic acids
mycorrhizal associations. Sorghum and maize are the two that facilitate P absorption, making it more accessible
distinct host plants which possess the ability to associate to plants. AMF inoculation also reduced Na+/K+ ratio
with arbuscularmycorrhizal fungi (AMF), both are also in sorghum plants under stressed conditions. Studies
commonly used for AMF propagation. In the study, have shown that AM symbiosis increases sodium
mycorrhizal association and colonization increased in (Na⁺) exclusion by sequestering it within intraradical
both cycles of propogation for both hosts. However, hyphae, thereby preventing its translocation to the
maize exhibited higher propagation and colonization shoots. This enhanced Na⁺ exclusion capacity is likely
(A) (B)
The interaction of AMF colonization (MCO) with the roots of maize (A) and sorghum (B) in first and
second cycle of propagation of and number of arbuscules (ARA) formed with respect to time
6 Indian Farming
November 2025
a contributing factor to the improved growth observed
in AM-inoculated plants. Additionally, AM fungi have
been proposed to limit Na⁺ uptake either by selective
absorption from the soil or by controlling its transfer
within the plant.
Mycorrhizal colonization and soil properties:
Microscopic observations confirmed the presence of
various growth stages of mycorrhizal development
within plant roots, including intraradical and extraradical
hyphae, arbuscules at different formation stages, and
vesicles. The overall colonization of sorghum roots
inoculated with AMF ranged from 8.3% to 58.3%.
Arbuscularmycorrhizal fungi (AMF) generally exhibit a
higher tolerance to salinity compared to plants. Under
stress conditions, plants reduce root biomass and invest
more in AMF associations, allowing the fungi to take over
Roots of AMF-inoculated sorghum plants demonstrated
essential water and nutrient acquisition. AMF’s beneficial
AMF colonization and abundance as their typical fungal
role is closely linked to the production of a fungal protein
structures were found under microscope
Electron micrograph (5000X) of root with visualization of (a) root hairs (b) mycorrhizal hyphae coiling the root hairs
(c) root exudates through Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)
Relationships between arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) colonization and Glomalin related soil proteins content in soil
Indian Farming 7
November 2025
View of the experiment at experimental farm Nain, Haryana Propagation of mycorrhiza in sorghum roots
called glomalin, which is quantified in soil as glomalin- Their symbiotic associations with plant roots facilitate
related soil protein (GRSP). In this study, GRSP content enhanced nutrient acquisition particularly phosphorus
was significantly higher in AM-inoculated soil compared and promote soil structural stability through glomalin-
to non-inoculated soil. The presence of AMF strongly mediated aggregation. AMF also play a significant role
correlates with microbial activity in the soil, as inoculated in mitigating salt stress by regulating ion uptake and
treatments exhibited higher microbiota populations. improving physiological balance in plants. Although
This suggests that AMF colonization efficiency may be the efficiency of AM symbiosis can vary depending on
influenced by bacterial communities acting as a third host plant and fungal genotypes, the ecological and
symbiotic partner. Soil microbial enzymes serve as agricultural benefits of AMF are well-documented.
indicators of microbiological activity, and the significantly Harnessing their potential through targeted inoculation
higher dehydrogenase and phosphatase enzyme activity strategies and AMF-friendly agronomic practices offers
in AMF-inoculated soil can likely be attributed to
a sustainable pathway for enhancing soil fertility,
increased microbial populations. These findings further
reducing reliance on synthetic inputs, and improving
highlight the role of phosphatase enzymes released by
crop productivity under both normal and stress-prone
AMF in enhancing plant phosphorus nutrition through
conditions. Continued research into the functional
hyphal transport.
dynamics of AMF will be critical for optimizing their
application in diverse agroecosystems and advancing
SUMMARY
sustainable agricultural practices.
Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) are integral part
of soil ecology in the maintenance and improvement of
*Corresponding author email: priyanka.chandra921@gmail.com
soil health, plant nutrition, and ecosystem resilience.
8 Indian Farming
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 09-12; November 2025
Harnessing genome editing for
developing climate-resilient crops
Anita Mann*, S. K. Sanwal, Ashwani Kumar, Nitish Ranjan Prakash,
Avni Dahiya, Arvind Kumar and R. K. Yadav
ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
Climate change poses a serious threat to world agriculture and food security due to the increasing
frequency of drought, salinity, heat, and other biotic or abiotic stresses. As a result, the development
of climate-resilient crops has become an urgent priority to maintain productivity in vulnerable
ecosystems. Recent technologies of genome editing using CRISPR/Cas are precise, accurate and
efficient tools for accelerating crop improvement. With genome editing, stress-responsive genes,
regulatory components, and metabolic pathways can be specifically altered without the hassles of
linkage drag or drawn-out breeding cycles. Recent advancements have successfully edited genes
linked to osmotic adjustment, antioxidant regulation, ion homeostasis, disease resistance and stress
signalling pathways in cereals, legumes, and oilseeds, leading to improved crop plants. In addition
to resilience against abiotic stresses, editing for characteristics such as nitrogen-use efficiency,
photosynthetic performance, and yield stability in variable climates presents a promising pathway for
sustainable agriculture. The integration of genome editing with genomic selection, speed breeding,
and high-throughput phenotyping can further expedite the creation of resilient varieties. This
article emphasizes significant breakthroughs, potential gene targets, and translational strategies
for implementing genome editing in crop breeding initiatives. Leveraging these innovations can
greatly enhance global food and nutritional security in the context of climate change.
Keywords: Abiotic stress, Cas9, CRISPR, Crop improvement, Genome editing
AGRICULTURAL productivity is increasingly of specific genes or regulatory elements responsible
threatened by various abiotic stresses such as for stress responses, without necessarily introducing
drought, salinity, extreme temperatures (heat and cold), foreign DNA. This precision reduces unintended effects
and nutrient imbalances. These environmental stressors and accelerates the development of improved crop
significantly affect plant growth, development, and varieties.
yield, posing a major challenge to global food security The most prominent genome editing tool, CRISPR-
especially in the face of climate change and a growing Cas9, along with other systems such as TALENs
world population. Although, conventional breeding (Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nucleases) and
methods have been employed for decades to develop ZFNs (Zinc Finger Nucleases), has been successfully
stress-tolerant crop varieties, but the major limiting applied to a wide range of crops including rice, wheat,
factor is the time, as to develop improved varieties maize, tomato, and soybean. These technologies are
takes years. being used to knock out negative regulators, enhance
In recent years, genome editing technologies have expression of stress-responsive genes, or even introduce
emerged as revolutionary tools for precise and targeted beneficial alleles for improved stress tolerance. In
genetic modifications, offering new avenues for addition to providing greater control over plant traits,
enhancing crop resilience to abiotic stress conditions. genome editing offers the possibility of multiplex gene
Unlike conventional breeding or transgenic approaches, editing-modifying multiple genes simultaneously to
genome editing allows for the direct manipulation address complex stress responses.
Indian Farming 9
November 2025
As a result, genome editing holds tremendous promise Recent innovations include epigenome editing, RNA
not only for improving abiotic stress tolerance but also editing, synthetic biology integration, and multiplex
for contributing to sustainable agriculture, reducing the editing, enabling simultaneous modification of multiple
need for chemical inputs, and supporting adaptation genes for complex trait improvement. Together, these
to changing environmental conditions. Recent studies tools mark a shift toward precision agriculture, with
have highlighted the potential of CRISPR/Cas system the potential to sustainably boost crop performance and
(cas9, 12, 13) in enhancing crop resilience to various global food security in the face of climate challenges.
biotic or abiotic stresses, including diseases, drought,
salinity, heat, and cold. Furthermore, advancements in Genome-editing enzymes
genome editing techniques, such as base editing and Genome-editing enzymes can be broadly categorized
prime editing, offer even more precise and efficient tools into two main types:
for crop improvement. • Site-specific recombinases (SSRs)
• Site-specific nucleases (SSNs)
Advancement in genome editing technologies
Table 1. Comparison of site-specific recombinases and site-specific
Early methods, such as random mutagenesis using nucleases in plants
radiation or chemicals, were crucial in generating
diversity but lacked precision. The introduction of Features Site-specific Site-specific
Recombinases (SSR’s) Nucleases (SSN’s)
transgenic technologies in the 1980s enabled the insertion
of specific genes, leading to genetically modified crops
Definition Enzymes that catalyse Enzymes that
like Bt cotton, though public and regulatory concerns recombination introduce double-
limited their adoption. between specific strand breaks
A major shift came with first-generation genome DNA sequences at specific DNA
(recombination without sequences
editing tools-ZFNs and TALENs which allowed
cutting)
targeted DNA modifications but were complex and
costly. The real breakthrough was CRISPR-Cas9 in 2012, Mechanism DNA rearrangement: DNA cleavage
offering a simple, precise, and scalable system guided excision, integration, followed by repair
inversion (NHEJ or HDR)
by RNA. Since then, tools like Cas12a, base editors, and
prime editing have expanded capabilities to include
DNA Cut No, recombination Yes, induces double-
fine-tuned gene changes without cutting DNA, or even without breaks strand breaks (DSB)
editing RNA.
Repair Pathway Direct recombination Requires DNA repair
(NHEJ or HDR)
Examples Cre/loxP, FLP/FRT, R/ ZFNs, TALENs,
RS CRISPR-Cas9,
CRISPR-Cas12a,
Cas13
Target Sites Specific recombination Custom-designed
sites DNA sequences (can
be any sequence)
Precision Very high (recombines High, but off-target
only defined sites) effects may occur
Use in Plants Marker gene removal, Gene knockout,
transgene stacking, gene replacement,
reversible gene base editing, trait
expression improvement
Delivery in Requires Delivered via
Plants transformation plasmids,
methods (e.g. Agrobacterium,
Agrobacterium or RNPs, or virus-based
particle bombardment) vectors; some edits
to introduce can be DNA-free
recombinase genes (transgene-free)
Flexibility High if sites are pre- Variable (depends on
inserted design, delivery, and
repair pathway)
Applications Gene cassette Trait modification,
excision, conditional genome editing,
expression, transgene targeted mutagenesis
stabilization
10 Indian Farming
November 2025
Types of site-specific nucleases • CRISPR-Cas system: CRISPR-Cas is a gene-
There are four types of site-specific nucleases- i) editing technology that allows scientists to make
Meganucleases ii) Zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) iii) precise, targeted changes to the DNA of living
Transcription activator like effector nucleases (TALENs) organisms. The term CRISPR stands for Clustered
iv) CRISPR-Cas Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats,
• Meganucleases: Meganucleases, a rare class of which are specific sequences found in the genomes
endonucleases which recognise and cleave long of bacteria and archaea. These sequences are
DNA sequences ranging from 14–-30 base pairs. part of a natural defence mechanism used by
Their high specificity makes them powerful tools microorganisms to identify and cut viral DNA
in gene editing. Originating from microbial sources during an infection. The Cas9 protein (short for
like yeast and bacteriophages, meganucleases are CRISPR-associated protein 9) is an endonuclease
naturally involved in intron and intein mobility. enzyme that functions as molecular scissors. It cuts
In gene editing, they induce double-strand breaks double-stranded DNA at locations defined by a
(DSBs) at specific genomic locations, which guide RNA (gRNA), which is engineered to match
are repaired by the cell’s mechanisms (NHEJ a specific sequence of interest. When introduced
or HDR) leading to gene disruption or precise into a cell, the CRISPR-Cas9 complex can locate
sequence insertion. Meganucleases’ exceptional the target DNA, introduce a double-strand break,
target specificity minimises off-target effects, but and allow for gene modification through the cell’s
designing new ones for each target is complex and own repair pathways-typically non-homologous
time-consuming. end joining (NHEJ) or homology-directed repair
• Zinc finger nucleases: Zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) (HDR).This programmable system enables precise
are engineered gene-editing tools that combine editing of genes and has wide applications in
a DNA-binding zinc finger protein with the FokI research, medicine, and biotechnology. Because of
endonuclease’s cleavage domain. Each zinc finger its efficiency, simplicity, and versatility compared
domain recognises a specific three-base pair DNA to earlier tools like zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs)
sequence, and multiple domains can target longer and TALENs, CRISPR-Cas9 has become the method
sequences. When two ZFN construct bind opposite of choice for many genetic engineering tasks.The
DNA strands at the target site, the FokI domains importance of this discovery was recognized in
dimerize, creating a double-strand break (DSB). This 2020 when Doudna and Charpentier were awarded
activates the cell’s repair pathways, leading to gene the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, marking a milestone
disruption or precise sequence modification. ZFNs, in the history of genetic engineering. There are
among the first programmable nucleases, have other Cas enzymes also like, Cas12a, which is a
been applied in various crops, viz. for improving Type V enzyme that creates staggered DNA cuts
herbicide tolerance in maize and oil quality in and recognizes a T-rich PAM. Cas13 is a Type VI
soybean. Their high specificity, achieved through enzyme that targets and cleaves RNA molecules.
careful zinc finger domain design, is strength.
However, developing effective ZFNs for new targets Mechanism in plants
is labour-intensive and requires significant protein CRISPR-Cas9, a system similar to its animal
engineering expertise. counterpart, enables precise genome editing in plants
• Transcription activator like effector nucleases: using RNA guidance. The guide RNA matches a specific
Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nucleases target site in the plant genome, directing the Cas9
(TALENs) are customizable gene-editing tools protein, an endonuclease from Streptococcus pyogenes,
composed of two main parts: A DNA-binding to the intended location. Once attached, Cas9 induces a
domain derived from transcription activator-like double-strand break (DSB) at the targeted site.Plant cells
effectors (TALEs) and a FokI nuclease domain activate their DNA repair machinery, employing non-
that cuts DNA. Each TALE repeat binds to a homologous end joining (NHEJ) or homology-directed
single nucleotide, allowing researchers to design repair (HDR). NHEJ introduces small insertions or
TALENs that target nearly any DNA sequence with deletions (indels), potentially disrupting gene function,
high precision. To function, two TALENs bind to while HDR can introduce specific DNA sequences if a
opposite strands of DNA flanking the target site. repair template is provided, enabling more precise gene
The FokI domains then dimerize to introduce a insertions or replacements. Delivery of CRISPR-Cas9
double-strand break (DSB) at the specified location. components into plant cells poses a unique challenge.
The cell repairs this break through either non- Agrobacterium tumefaciens mediated transformation
homologous end joining (NHEJ), which can disrupt is commonly used in dicotyledonous plants, while
genes, or homology-directed repair (HDR), which biolistic delivery, or the gene gun method, is used in
allows precise genetic changes. TALENs are known monocots and recalcitrant species. The choice of delivery
for their accuracy and versatility, with fewer off- method depends on the plant species, the targeted
target effects compared to earlier tools. However, tissue, and the desired outcome. CRISPR-Cas9 offers a
TALENS mechanism of gene editing is costly, labour powerful and precise tool for plant genetic engineering,
intensive and time consuming. revolutionising plant biology and crop improvement.
Indian Farming 11
November 2025
Key applications in plants editing with higher specificity. Base editing directly
Crop yield enhancement: CRISPR-Cas9 can be used converts one DNA base to another, correcting single-
to enhance crop yield by targeting genes limiting grain nucleotide polymorphisms or introducing subtle
size and improving fruit size. variations. Prime editing, often called a “search-
Disease resistance: CRISPR-Cas9 confers disease and-replace” tool, combines a catalytically impaired
resistance in crops by editing susceptibility genes, Cas9 with a reverse transcriptase, enabling precise
leading to resistance against diseases like powdery insertions, deletions, and substitutions without donor
mildew and cassava brown streak virus or any other templates or DSBs. Integrating these technologies
targeted disease. with high-throughput phenotyping, artificial
Stress tolerance and nutrition: CRISPR-Cas9 intelligence, and epigenome editing will create
enhances abiotic stress tolerance in crops and improves climate-smart and resource-efficient crops. Breeders
nutritional content by editing stress-response regulators will gain access to traits like nitrogen-use efficiency,
and metabolic pathways. improved photosynthesis, and abiotic stress tolerance.
Innovations in delivery systems, like nanocarriers or
Challenges in plant CRISPR applications DNA-free genome editing, could address regulatory
• Delivery efficiency: Unlike animal cells, plant challenges and public concerns related to genetically
cells have rigid walls, making gene delivery more modified organisms (GMOs).
difficult.
SUMMARY
• Regulatory hurdles: Many countries have complex
CRISPR-Cas9 has revolutionised plant genetics by
laws regarding genome-edited crops; some regulate
offering a precise, cost-effective, and adaptable genome
CRISPR-modified crops similarly to GMOs.
editing platform. Its successful implementation across
• Off-Target effects: Although rare, unintended
various plant species has opened new avenues for
mutations are a concern, especially in polyploid
addressing global agricultural challenges. As climate
species.
change, soil degradation, limited arable land, and
• Multi gene copy: In many crops like wheat, there
population growth pose significant threats, genome
may be more than one gene copy for one trait which
editing tools provide a strategic solution for enhancing
makes it difficult to edit all copies.
crop resilience, yield, and nutritional quality. Next-
generation gene editing tools offer more refined, safe,
Future perspectives
and predictable genome modifications, paving the
Advancements in genome editing, like CRISPR-
way for sustainable and resilient crops that reduce
Cas12a, base editing, and prime editing, significantly
agrochemical dependence and improve food security in
improve precision and efficiency in plant genome
a changing climate. However, responsible and equitable
engineering. Unlike CRISPR-Cas9, these newer tools
use of these powerful tools requires interdisciplinary
enable precise gene modifications without DSBs,
research, robust biosafety frameworks, and transparent
reducing the risk of off-target effects and unintended
public engagement.
mutations. CRISPR-Cas12a has a unique PAM
recognition and staggered cuts, making it suitable for
*Corresponding author email: anitadgr13@gmail.com
targeting inaccessible genomic regions and multiplex
TEXTBOOK ON
CHEESE TECHNOLOGY
“Textbook on Cheese Technology” is an excellent compilation of the basics of cheese
technology, incorporating the advances that are taking place in the modern cheese industry
in order to tackle issues such as cheese manufacturing, quality, mechanization, safety, cost,
environment etc.
This textbook is written with a view to cater to the evolving needs of the rapidly growing
cheese industry and highly suited for the Dairy and Food Science Colleges of the globe.
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
Pages: v + 369; Price: ` 600.00, US$ 90.00; Postage: `50
ISBN No.: 978-81-7164-273-1
For obtaining copies, please contact: SCAN QR Code to
Purchase Online
Business Unit
ICAR-Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan – I, Pusa, New Delhi 110012
Tel: 011-25843657; email: businessuniticar@gmail.com
website: www.icar.org.in
12 Indian Farming
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 13-15; November 2025
Nature-based solutions with ecosystem
services gains for managing saline waterlogged landscapes in semi-arid regions
R. Banyal* and Varun Saini
ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
Soil salinity and waterlogging are major land degradation challenges, particularly in arid and
semi-arid regions, severely impacting agricultural productivity and ecological stability. In India,
approximately 8.5 million hectares are affected, largely due to poorly managed irrigation systems
lacking proper drainage. Bio-drainage, using deep-rooted trees to remove excess water through
transpiration emerges as a sustainable, low-cost, and eco-friendly alternative to traditional
drainage methods. Tree-based bio-remediation models, particularly those involving Eucalyptus
tereticornis, Prosopis juliflora, Acacia nilotica, and Tamarix aphylla, have been successfully
implemented across varying degrees of salinity and waterlogging. These models provide multiple
ecosystem services: provisioning (fuelwood, timber, fodder), regulating (carbon sequestration,
groundwater control, climate moderation), supporting (biodiversity enhancement, soil health),
and cultural (aesthetic and recreational value). Eucalyptus-based models in moderately affected
areas demonstrated the highest biomass yield, carbon sequestration, and microclimate regulation.
Despite these benefits, cultural services and social values remain under-researched. For broader
adoption, future strategies should emphasize ecosystem service valuation, community participation,
and location-specific species selection to ensure long-term sustainability and resilience of saline
waterlogged landscapes.
Keywords: Agroforestry, Ecological restoration, Groundwater management, Soil salinity, Waterlogging
SOIL salinity and waterlogging are major forms strategies, including agroforestry, have shown promise
of land degradation that threaten agricultural in managing saline waterlogged areas by providing
productivity and ecological stability, particularly in arid both reclamation and a range of ecosystem services.
and semi-arid regions. Globally, about 33% of irrigated
land, nearly 1.0 billion hectares is affected by these twin Bio-drainage as a solution for saline waterlogged areas
issues. In India, around 8.5 million hectares of lands Bio-drainage is the process by which deep-rooted
are impacted, including 5.5 million ha with combined plants use their bio-energy to absorb excess soil water
salinity and waterlogging problems, approximately and release it into the atmosphere through transpiration.
2.3 million ha each within and outside canal command While primarily explored for water table control, bio-
areas. Primary cause is the introduction of irrigation drainage also offers both curative and preventive
systems without proper drainage. States such as applications. However, its economic viability and the
Haryana, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, broader benefits, including tangible and ecosystem
Punjab, West Bengal, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil services, remain largely unexamined in current literature.
Nadu, Rajasthan, and Kerala are significantly affected.
Waterlogging severity is defined by groundwater depth Tree based bio-remediation models
potentially waterlogged (≤3 m), waterlogged (≤1.5 m), Tree-based models using Eucalyptus tereticornis,
and severely waterlogged (0–30 cm). Traditional Prosopis juliflora, Acacia nilotica, and Tamarix aphylla were
drainage methods, though effective, are capital- adopted across saline waterlogged areas, with species
intensive and raise environmental concerns. In contrast, distribution varying by salinity severity. Eucalyptus
bio-drainage offers a cost-effective, low-input, and thrived in less to moderately affected areas, while Prosopis,
eco-friendly solution. Nature-based bio-remediation Acacia, and Tamarix were suited to severely impacted
Indian Farming 13
November 2025
Eucalyptus in block model
areas. In less affected regions, boundary plantations Provisioning services: Plantations in saline
(1.5–2.0 m spacing) were common, transitioning to block waterlogged areas provide vital services such as food,
plantations (1.0 × 3.0 m) in moderately affected areas. fodder, fuel, fibre, and timber. Eucalyptus tereticornis
Severely affected zones lacked structured planting based bio-drainage model yielded up to 28.65 Mg/ha of
geometry. Block and boundary models were widely timber and 1.84 Mg/ha of fuelwood.Total biomass (above
used in such conditions. Block plantations followed and below ground) ranged from 102 to 186 Mg/ha,
spacings of 1.5 × 3.0 m, 1.5 × 4.0 m, or 1.5 × 6.0 m, while outperforming other species. Eucalyptus based models
boundary models employed single-row planting at 1.5 m on moderately saline and waterlogged sites produced
spacing and strip plantations with 1.5 × 2.0 m (parallel 30 Mg/ha of biomass which was 62.3% and 84.5%
rows) or 1.5 × 1.5 m (staggered rows). higher than those on less and severely affected areas in
Haryana, respectively.
Ecosystem services associated with bio-drainage models in saline Regulating services: Trees planted for bio-drainage
waterlogged areas play a significant role in climate change mitigation
There is no universally accepted typology of through carbon sequestration and groundwater
ecosystem services, but they are broadly understood regulation. Eucalyptus globulus has been reported
as the benefits humans derive from ecosystems. These to sequester 3.3 to 11.5 Mg C/ha/yr over 10 years,
services are categorized into four types: provisioning, while Eucalyptus tereticornis on saline waterlogged
regulating, supporting, and cultural. Tree-based bio- soils accumulated 15.5 Mg C/ha in 5 years. It was
remediation models on waterlogged saline soils offer found that agroforestry systems on waterlogged soils
multiple benefits, including food, fodder, fuelwood, sequestered 15.82 Mg C/ha and 58.03 Mg CO₂/ha,
and income. Through leaf litter and root decomposition, and bio-saline systems captured 6 Mg CO₂ eq./ha.
they improve soil health, sequester carbon, moderate Groundwater drawdown of up to 15.7 m was recorded
the local climate, and enhance landscape aesthetics. under plantations, with Acacia mangium and Casuarina
These are part of a broader range of ecosystem services systems lowering water levels by 3.2 m. Additionally,
delivered by tree-based land uses. tree canopies moderate microclimates, reducing
Eucalyptus in boundary model Sporadic trees in waterlogged saline soil
14 Indian Farming
November 2025
summer temperatures by 2–4°C and slightly raising contributing 93%, 67%, and 82% of the total basal area,
them in winter. Species like Dalbergia sissoo and respectively.
Casuarina equisetifolia enhance soil nutrient availability Cultural services: Cultural ecosystem services,
(NPK) through improved litter decomposition. Bio- non-material benefits such as spiritual, cognitive,
remediation models in these areas can help in reduction recreational, and aesthetic experiences are often difficult
of greenhouse gas emissions. Eucalyptus based bio- to quantify despite being well recognized. A pilot study
remediation models in moderately saline waterlogged in saline waterlogged areas of Haryana found that
areas showed superior regulating services, including tree-based land use systems (LUS) offered the highest
cultural services (aesthetics and social recreation), while
higher carbon stock, carbon sequestration, and better
fallow lands recorded the lowest. Cultural services
regulation of air and soil temperatures. The greenhouse
were found to be more prominent in Eucalyptusbased
gas (GHG) emissions were reduced under tree canopies,
models on less affected sites, and comparatively lower
with the lowest CO flux observed in Eucalyptus
2 in isolated trees on severely affected sites. Despite these
models at moderately affected sites, lowest NO flux
2 insights, cultural services remain underrepresented in
in isolated tree models at severely affected sites, and
lowest CH flux in Eucalyptus models at less affected the available literature and merit further research.
4
sites. Soil properties were comparatively better in less
affected sites, declining with increasing salinity and SUMMARY
waterlogging. Higher ECe values were observed under Saline and waterlogged soils threaten agricultural
isolated tree based models, particularly in the topsoil sustainability, especially in poorly drained in-land
(0–15 cm). Soil organic carbon (SOC) was highest under irrigated areas. Bio-drainage, using deep-rooted tree
Eucalyptus (boundary) models in less affected areas species to remove excess water through transpiration,
(0.33%) and block models in moderately affected areas. offers a costeffective and eco-friendly solution. Tree based
Available nitrogen and potassium were generally low, bio-drainage models support land reclamation while
while phosphorus remained in the medium range. delivering a range of ecosystem services viz. provisioning,
Eucalyptus based models in moderately affected site regulating, supporting, and cultural. Eucalyptus based
gave higher soil microbial count (MBC) values than models particularly in moderately affected areas have
Eucalyptus based models in less and isolated tree based shown high biomass yields and ecosystem benefits.
models in severely affected sites. However, cultural and social values of such systems
Supporting services: Biodiversity studies in saline remain underexplored. Future efforts should prioritize
waterlogged areas are limited, but it is well established holistic ecosystem valuation, community involvement,
that tree plantations in such regions support key and site-specific species selection to enhance the
ecosystem services. Eucalyptus based models on sustainability and acceptance of these models in
moderately affected sites showed higher site stability managing saline waterlogged landscapes.
(Shannon-Wiener index) and plant diversity (Simpson’s
index). Eucalyptus emerged as the dominant species
*Corresponding author email: drbanyal08@gmail.com
across all less, moderately and severely affected sites,
Greenhouses Design for
Indian Agroclimatic Zones
Greenhouses Design for
Indian Agroclimatic Zones “This book is a practical and comprehensive guide focused on the design and construction
S R a a n k d e e sh e  p S  h M a a rd n a n of greenhouse suited to the diverse agroclimatic zones of India. S.N.Jha
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
ISBN:978-81-7164-294-6
Pages: 149; Price: ` 800.00, US$ 100.00; Postage: `100
www.icar.org.in Indian Council Noef wA gDreicluhiltural Research
ISBN No.: 978-81-7164-294-6
For obtaining copies, please contact:
SCAN QR Code to
Business Unit Purchase Online
ICAR-Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan – I, Pusa, New Delhi 110012
Tel: 011-25843657; email: businessuniticar@gmail.com
website: www.icar.org.in
Indian Farming 15
November 2025
Greenhouses Design
for Indian
Agroclimatic
Zones
GGGrrreeeeeennnhhhooouuussseeesss DDDeeesssiiigggnnn fffooorrr IIInnndddiiiaaannn AAAgggrrrooocccllliiimmmaaatttiiiccc ZZZooonnneeesss
Tctac oo us h m l e t tuh i nv pb e ap ro ed tr o ie hi o v k d e n e i n“ cr o Gsstfa ie r f ve be ea e rl ges gn r u a h woi o v cd el u i e ai a m s tb feo hl a e sc et u rs i D c, s o w e ze lu o sd at i n t go ioee nn nrs t . f soho cfer a I d rn I c nedi d t siay iiag ,. nnIan n a A td nh g d se r o h c f co rai lncn im es k t i a on rtufg i cc i nl t a Zico nr oned n a oe asfs vi gn ” a rgi ie l s ace bhna ia l h i p lt oly r eua ,n sc pget re is o c s t as,e ul s c ia ut t ne echdd d
eeca Tspiam n r t c g xn h lva o r e r p r v eu en op to li c ha s r n s c c wo t t io s l i n uu mi n n md eI e rrg n m r i e e d g a d e g o s n e h t n i u f a ti wnt c ta i ' c t d s j a i n o a o t z t a ar d h r l i no e n n e g c ns c t a r s c po ies e o d t o u rn s, i , c e a v si d i t l nr cg e e i o a i m a tt c r r f b ii t e a l c co a ui iI d p lo o an n t idt v h n l i s d i c yi n e ns i . e i c z a r ,g L f d ax o s a. o oal e s n l V r l ma i c pe a t ao o dt ed s pp rf h r . i i s p e cl f wo , e fe a r w u e so hl c l e s c r i o a i e tu c c tc n h m o h nt l h a c i to s ae e e t e p n i rt p s c on eh e ,r , t ns l o c o s aa sua i p ddy a nr os s f od l e d o f e ur o a r e m t s g t n fs, wt r h ud s p r e seui et h t n e i c r c dl a n d i uFt l t s ih , w u c m i y i n o sr s t ip a ui t n a u t o hl l r t e o a s a n e e a w n s l s E a t h n , . at t fl o ie e s e n e n I w t n e m c t g a y h i t , l p s i e t y c n o mh r snu r oo n e o itni s lv cs o pt d , i o e M d g ea c s ey th f rc ue h o , s t o ct e ic r h t v h i c h dc y s i o e e t e a p ap d ys s n te se , , a, v g s c a ai ta a i l i n n n h e f o r r i d d g d ee y c f
i Icfnsr t oo ta r i r ei vn t g pu ec a vr r - l a t u a i b n i r o d ly il goy n e - h u s si v n es t a e t a e n e d tt pg ty ein ip r t lca g a a e lt , t i a s l e c i e o r o di d o nt o y f . p dl i ,o in g s li gc yr n e,u h c ve s ol en u s u ni h ds oto ie in n lus a g o s t a nieo fn s m o n d, u , a arcn n an ldi a nm d a g g h ta i i n n i u to g egm n - t i cf hd d ro e oi en t m iy s n t ri ct go eos nl rn lie n m , t d ar c po l l sl gl a e. y r d C s e d obt e ei na n nmmsh g to s bru ,i u o n c a s o s t r e i te o s a e ntdl n r l t ea v ue st i c rc ict o o h ru n ni nrb m , ei e qs a e d u n n eti t dnos,
Tionh ft p ies rr o betso eto cek td e i sidn i c npu tre lot n itv deace ttd ieo fdn o scr uy r s eltt sieve maatr sico. hne. rTsh, isst buodoekn tws,i lfla sremrveer sa,s a an dre pfoelriecnymcea fkoerr dse wshigon aerres
Indian Farming 75 (11): 16-19; November 2025
Understanding the adverse effects of salinity
on lentil growth: Mechanisms and responses
Vijayata Singh* and Jogendra Singh
ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
Salinity is a major abiotic stress that significantly impairs lentil (Lens culinaris Medik.) growth,
development, and productivity, especially in arid and semi-arid regions. This chapter provides a
comprehensive overview of the physiological, biochemical, molecular, and agronomic responses of
lentil to salinity stress. Salinity disrupts lentil growth at all stages- germination, vegetative, and
reproductive- through osmotic stress, ion toxicity, and nutrient imbalances. Plants respond by
accumulating osmoprotectants like proline and glycine betaine, activating antioxidant enzymes
such as superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), and peroxidase (POD), and modifying
photosynthetic and ionic regulation mechanisms. Advanced understanding of salt tolerance is
facilitated by transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and ionomics, identifying stress-responsive
genes, proteins, and metabolites. Breeding efforts involving wild relatives, marker-assisted selection
(MAS), and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are underway, complemented by transgenic
and genome editing tools. Integration of high-throughput phenotyping and agronomic practices,
such as seed priming and soil amendments, holds promise for developing salt-tolerant lentil
varieties. The article underscores a multidisciplinary approach to enhance lentil resilience under
salinity for sustainable pulse production.
Keywords: Antioxidant enzymes, Ion toxicity, Lentil, Osmotic stress
LENTIL (Lens culinaris Medik.) is a self-pollinated performance under salt stress is crucial for designing
diploid legume (2n = 2x = 14) that plays a significant effective breeding programmes aimed at sustaining
role in sustainable agriculture due to its ability to fix yield in salt-affected areas.
atmospheric nitrogen. As a rich source of protein (20–
30%), minerals, and dietary fiber, lentil is crucial in Impact of salinity on lentil growth and development
the diet of millions, especially in South Asia and the Salinity stress is one of the most detrimental abiotic
Mediterranean region. However, salinity is a major factors affecting lentil productivity, especially in arid and
abiotic stress limiting lentil productivity in arid and semi-arid regions where soil salinization is exacerbated
semi-arid regions, where soil and water salinization by poor irrigation management and climate change. Salt
are becoming widespread due to climate change, poor stress disrupts physiological and metabolic functions in
irrigation practices, and high evapotranspiration rates. lentil at all developmental stages from germination to seed
Salinity affects more than 20% of irrigated agricultural filling, ultimately leading to reduced plant vigour and
land worldwide, posing a serious challenge to global food significant yield losses. Salt stress adversely affects lentil
security. Lentil, being moderately salt-sensitive, exhibits growth at all stages, from germination to pod formation
considerable variation in its tolerance across genotypes. and seed filling. The primary mechanisms include osmotic
Understanding the physiological, biochemical, and stress, ion toxicity (mainly Na⁺ and Cl⁻), and nutritional
molecular responses of lentil to salt stress is essential for imbalance, leading to poor germination, stunted growth,
identifying resilient cultivars. In addition, the integration reduced nodulation, chlorosis, and ultimately lower
of conventional breeding with modern biotechnological yields. High salt concentrations reduce water uptake,
tools offers promising strategies for improving lentil’s disturb hormonal balances, and impair photosynthesis
salinity tolerance. A comprehensive evaluation of lentil due to stomatal closure and chlorophyll degradation.
16 Indian Farming
November 2025
Germination under saline conditions is particularly Physiological and biochemical responses
sensitive. Seedlings exposed to electrical conductivity Salt stress profoundly affects the physiological and
(EC) levels above 6 dS/m show drastic reductions biochemical processes of lentil, disrupting normal
in root and shoot length, fresh and dry weight, and metabolic functions and leading to growth retardation
vigour index. and yield loss. Plants under saline conditions experience
Germination and early seedling growth: The both osmotic stress and ionic stress, which collectively
germination stage is highly vulnerable to salinity. impair essential physiological activities. Under salt
Saline soils lead to increased osmotic potential of the stress, lentil plants accumulate osmolytes such as
soil solution, making it difficult for seeds to absorb proline, glycine betaine, and soluble sugars to maintain
water, thereby delaying or inhibiting germination. osmotic balance. Increased antioxidant enzyme activity,
Furthermore, ion toxicity, particularly from Na⁺ and including superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase
Cl⁻, damages embryonic tissues and inhibits enzymatic (CAT), and peroxidase (POD), helps mitigate oxidative
activities essential for seed metabolism studies have stress induced by reactive oxygen species (ROS).
shown that electrical conductivity (EC) levels exceeding Photosynthetic efficiency decreases significantly under
6 dS/m significantly impair germination parameters in salinity, with reduced chlorophyll content, disturbed
gas exchange parameters (e.g. net photosynthetic
lentil. Seedlings subjected to high salinity demonstrate:
rate, stomatal conductance), and altered chlorophyll
• Decreased germination percentage
fluorescence (Fv/Fm), indicating stress-induced damage
• Reduced root and shoot lengths
to the photosystem II (PSII).
• Lower fresh and dry biomass
Osmolyte accumulation: One of the primary adaptive
• Declined vigour index
responses of lentil to salinity is the accumulation
Vegetative growth: During the vegetative phase,
of osmoprotectants or compatible solutes, such as
salinity causes stunted plant growth due to inhibited cell
proline, glycine betaine, and soluble sugars. These low
expansion and division. Ion toxicity results in chlorosis
molecular weight compounds contribute to maintaining
(yellowing of leaves) and necrosis due to oxidative
cellular osmotic balance, protecting macromolecules
stress and nutrient imbalances. Salt stress often induces
and membranes, and stabilizing proteins and enzymes
a deficiency of essential nutrients such as K⁺, Ca²⁺,
under stress conditions. Among these, proline plays a
and Mg²⁺ by competitive inhibition with Na⁺ and Cl⁻.
particularly crucial role in osmotic adjustment, ROS
This imbalance interferes with metabolic activities and
scavenging, membrane stabilization, and signaling
reduces photosynthetic capacity. Key effects observed
for stress responses. Glycine betaine helps protect the
include:
photosynthetic apparatus and maintain chloroplast
• Shortened internodes and plant height
integrity, while soluble sugars serve as both osmolytes
• Reduced number of leaves and leaf area
and signaling molecules influencing stress gene
• Disturbed water relations and turgor maintenance
expression.
• Impaired nodulation and nitrogen fixation, affecting
Antioxidant defense mechanism: Salt stress triggers
overall plant nutrition
the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
Reproductive development: Salt stress adversely
such as superoxide radicals (O₂⁻), hydrogen peroxide
affects flowering, pod formation, and seed filling, which
(H₂O₂), and hydroxyl radicals (OH⁻), which cause
are critical for yield determination. The hormonal
oxidative damage to cellular structures. To mitigate this
imbalance under stress, particularly altered levels of
oxidative damage, lentil plants activate an enzymatic
auxins, cytokinins, and abscisic acid (ABA), leads to
antioxidant defense system comprising:
flower and pod abortion, reduced pollen viability,
• Superoxide dismutase (SOD): Catalyzes the
and poor fertilization. Salinity-induced stress during
dismutation of superoxide radicals into hydrogen
reproductive stages results in:
peroxide and oxygen.
• Delayed flowering and maturity
• Catalase (CAT): Decomposes hydrogen peroxide
• Reduced number of pods per plant
into water and oxygen, thus preventing H₂O₂
• Lower seed set and smaller seeds accumulation.
• Poor seed quality (protein and micronutrient • Peroxidases (POD): Help detoxify peroxides using
content) various electron donors.
Physiological and biochemical disruptions: High salt This enhanced antioxidant activity is vital for
concentrations affect key physiological processes: maintaining cellular redox homeostasis and protecting
• Photosynthesis inhibition due to chlorophyll the integrity of cellular components under salinity stress.
degradation and stomatal closure Photosynthetic impairment: Salinity also negatively
• Decreased relative water content (RWC) and water impacts photosynthesis, which is a central physiological
use efficiency (WUE) process directly linked to plant productivity. Key
• Altered enzyme activities and energy metabolism photosynthetic responses under salt stress include:
• Oxidative stress from reactive oxygen species (ROS), • Reduced chlorophyll content: Due to degradation
leading to membrane damage of chlorophyll pigments or inhibited chlorophyll
These combined effects significantly compromise biosynthesis, resulting in chlorosis and reduced
lentil productivity under saline conditions. light-harvesting capacity.
Indian Farming 17
November 2025
• Disturbed gas exchange: Decline in net using marker-assisted selection (MAS) and genome-
photosynthetic rate (Pn), stomatal conductance (gs), wide association studies (GWAS) is still emerging
and transpiration rate, primarily due to stomatal for lentil.
closure aimed at conserving water under osmotic
stress. Biotechnological and omics approaches
• Altered chlorophyll fluorescence parameters (Fv/ Biotechnological interventions offer promising tools
Fm): Indicating photo inhibition and damage to for dissecting and enhancing salt tolerance. Genetic
Photosystem II (PSII), a critical site for light energy transformation studies introducing AtNHX1, BADH,
conversion in the thylakoid membrane. or P5CS genes in lentil have improved salt tolerance,
These impairments collectively lead to reduced though stable transformation remains challenging
carbon assimilation, growth, and eventually lower due to genotype dependency and low transformation
biomass and yield. efficiency.‘Omics’ approaches, such as transcriptomics,
Ion homeostasis and membrane stability: Under proteomics, metabolomics, and ionomics, provide
salinity stress, lentil plants experience ion toxicity, system-level insights into stress responses. Integration
primarily due to the accumulation of Na⁺ and Cl⁻ ions in of multi-omics datasets is facilitating the identification
tissues, which disrupt the K⁺/Na⁺ balance and enzyme of candidate genes and molecular pathways involved
function. Salt-tolerant genotypes exhibit better ability in salinity tolerance in lentil. Salinity stress exerts a
to exclude Na⁺, maintain higher K⁺ levels, and restrict significant negative impact on lentil productivity by
ion transport to shoots. Additionally, these genotypes disrupting physiological, biochemical, and molecular
demonstrate enhanced membrane stability, often processes such as osmotic balance, nutrient uptake,
assessed by parameters such as electrolyte leakage and photosynthesis, and antioxidant defense. Conventional
lipid peroxidation, with lower levels indicating stronger breeding for salt tolerance has been limited by
cell membrane integrity under stress. complex inheritance patterns, polygenic control, and
Molecular and genetic mechanisms: Salinity tolerance genotype-environment interactions. In this context,
in lentil is a quantitative trait governed by multiple biotechnological and 'omics'-based tools provide novel
genes, including those involved in ion transport, osmotic avenues for understanding and enhancing salt tolerance
regulation, and transcriptional regulation. Genes such as in lentils.
NHX1 (Na⁺/H⁺ antiporter), SOS1, HKT1, and P5CS (Δ1- Biotechnological interventions: Genetic engineering
pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase) have been studied has enabled the functional characterization and transfer
for their roles in ion compartmentalization and proline of stress-responsive genes from model systems into
biosynthesis under salt stress. lentils and other legumes. Some key transgenic strategies
Transcriptome studies under salt stress have employed include:
identified differentially expressed genes associated with • Overexpression of AtNHX1 (Arabidopsis Na⁺/
stress signaling pathways, hormone metabolism, and H⁺ antiporter) gene, which mediates vacuolar
transcription factors such as MYB, bZIP, NAC, and WRKY. sequestration of excess Na⁺ ions, thereby improving
These gene families modulate various downstream cellular ion homeostasis under salinity stress.
responses for cellular protection and adaptation. • BADH (betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase), which
catalyzes the synthesis of glycine betaine, an
Screening and breeding for salt tolerance osmoprotectant, has been introduced into lentil
Conventional screening methods in lentil involve and chickpea to improve osmotic adjustment under
evaluating germplasm in hydroponics, sand culture, saline conditions.
and saline field conditions for traits like germination • P5CS (Δ¹-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase),
rate, seedling vigour, Na⁺/K⁺ ratio, biomass, and yield involved in proline biosynthesis, enhances
components. Several landraces and wild relatives (e.g. osmotic tolerance and antioxidant defense when
Lens orientalis, Lens ervoides) have shown promise for salt overexpressed in legumes.
tolerance and can be used in pre-breeding programmes. Although such transgenic approaches show promising
These wild species often possess adaptive traits such physiological improvements (e.g. better chlorophyll
as efficient ion homeostasis, deeper root architecture, retention, higher K⁺/Na⁺ ratio, and increased yield
and higher antioxidant enzyme activities. To ensure under salt stress), stable transformation of lentil remains
reliable phenotyping, multi-environment trials and a major bottleneck, owing to genotype dependency,
standardized protocols are crucial for identifying low regeneration frequency, and poor transformation
stable, high-performing genotypes. Controlled efficiency. Hence, there is a need to optimize tissue
screening under simulated salt conditions allows for culture protocols and explore genome editing tools such
early-stage selection, reducing field-level variability. as CRISPR/Cas9 for more targeted and efficient genetic
Integration of high-throughput phenotyping tools, manipulation.
such as imaging and chlorophyll fluorescence sensors, Omics approaches: The rapid development of high-
is enhancing the precision of salt tolerance screening. throughput omics technologies has revolutionized plant
Molecular markers (e.g. SSRs, SNPs) linked to salt- stress biology by enabling a system-level understanding
tolerance QTLs have been identified, though, limited of complex traits like salinity tolerance. In lentil, multiple
compared to major crops. Genomic-assisted breeding omics approaches are being integrated to identify stress-
18 Indian Farming
November 2025
responsive genes, proteins, metabolites, and ionomic Tools like WGCNA (Weighted Gene Co-expression
signatures: Network Analysis) and machine learning algorithms are
• Transcriptomics: RNA-seq studies have revealed being used to correlate molecular data with physiological
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to traits, making omics-guided breeding more precise and
ion transporters (NHX, SOS1), transcription factors effective.
(DREB, WRKY, NAC), and antioxidant enzymes
under salinity stress in salt-tolerant vs. sensitive Management strategies and agronomic practices
lentil genotypes. These data form the basis for Agronomic strategies can complement genetic
marker development and candidate gene selection. approaches to mitigate salt stress in lentil. These include:
• Soil amendments: Gypsum and organic matter to
• Proteomics: Protein profiling under salt stress
improve soil structure and reduce Na⁺ toxicity.
has identified upregulated proteins related to
• Seed priming: Using salt solutions, hormones (GA₃,
ROS detoxification (e.g. superoxide dismutase,
SA), or osmoprotectants (proline, PEG) improves
peroxidase), photosynthesis, and chaperones (e.g.
germination and early growth under salt stress.
HSPs), supporting enhanced cellular protection
• Irrigation management: Using saline water
mechanisms.
judiciously with proper leaching and drainage.
• Metabolomics: Metabolite profiling has detected
• Crop rotation: Including salt-tolerant crops like
higher accumulation of compatible solutes like
barley can reduce salt accumulation.
proline, sugars, and polyols in tolerant genotypes.
Integrated management combining tolerant
These metabolites help in osmotic adjustment, ROS
genotypes with improved agronomy holds the key for
scavenging, and maintaining membrane integrity
sustaining lentil production in saline soils.
under saline conditions.
• Ionomics: Ionomic analyses reveal the ability of
SUMMARY
tolerant genotypes to exclude Na⁺, maintain high
Salt stress poses a significant threat to lentil
K⁺/Na⁺ ratios, and accumulate beneficial ions like
production globally. Advances in genomics,
Ca²⁺ and Mg²⁺, indicating efficient ion homeostasis
transcriptomics, and high-throughput phenotyping are
and signalling.
paving the way for dissecting complex salt-tolerance
traits. Developing multi-stress-resilient lentil varieties
Multi-omics integration through integrated breeding and biotechnological
Recent advances now allow integration of tools, along with farmer-friendly agronomic practices,
transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, and ionomic will ensure sustainable lentil production in the face of
datasets, enabling the construction of gene regulatory increasing soil salinization.
networks and the identification of hub genes or
master regulators. Such integrative omics approaches
are essential for the discovery of novel molecular
markers, QTLs, and biotechnological targets for lentil *Corresponding author email: vijayatasingh.gpb@gmail.com
improvement under salinity.
TEXTBOOK OF
WATERSHED HYDROLOGY
“Textbook of Watershed Hydrology” is an attempt to fill the gap of quality textbooks in
one of the major subjects namely the watershed hydrology. It is believed that the principles
and practices of watershed hydrology will resolve the national land and water degradation
problems.
The textbook is divided into 13 Chapters. Beginning with general introduction to hydrology,
it covers the chapter-wise global and Indian water balance, precipitation measurement and
analysis procedures.
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
Pages: v + 478; Price: ` 1000.00, US$ 90.00; Postage: `50
ISBN No.: 978-81-7164-203-8
For obtaining copies, please contact:
SCAN QR Code to
Business Unit Purchase Online
ICAR-Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan – I, Pusa, New Delhi 110012
Tel: 011-25843657; email: businessuniticar@gmail.com
website: www.icar.org.in
Indian Farming 19
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 20-22; November 2025
Remote sensing applications in monitoring
and management of soil and water pollution
Krishan Kanahiya*, Parul Sundha and D. S. Bundela
ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
Pollution of soil and water is major problem all around the world that effects the condition of
ecosystem, agricultural productivity and well-being of human lifestyles. Traditionally, tracking
and managing these problems require a lotof fieldwork, which can be laborious, time consuming
and has limited both spatial and geographical coverage. A useful alternative is remote sensing,
offers a promising alternative by making it possible to gather data from multiple sensors on a large
scale and frequently. This article addresses the newest developments, methods and data types in the
field of remote sensing, which investigates how remote sensing can be used to track and control soil
and water pollution.
Keywords: Ecosystem, Remote sensing, Soil and water pollution, Tracking
INDIA has achieved tremendous progress in remote Principles of remote sensing in pollution monitoring
sensing technology, with numerous centres and Remote sensing (RS) is a technique that collects data
organization devoted towards the applications, research regarding the Earth's surface from afar, utilizing sensors
and policy creation in this area. The supreme institute affixed to satellites, airplanes and drones. It is based on
for space organization for space research is Indian
detection and analysing electromagnetic energy that is
Space Research Organisation (ISRO). It runs a huge
absorbed or released by objects. Specific spectral patterns
network of earth observation satellite, which include
linked with pollutants or environmental changes may
CartoSat, ResourseSat and RISAT series, offer useful
be helpful in the detection and quantification of soil and
information for tracking the soil and water pollution. Its
water contamination levels. Remote sensing collects
subsidiary organisations like National remote sensing
hyperspectral, thermal and multi-spectral data that may
centre (NRSC), Hyderabad and Indian Institution of
Remote Sensing (IIRS), Dehradun play a crucial role be examined and processed for recognizing pollution
for development of satellites and carrying out capacity- anomalies.
building initiatives. The Northern Space Application
centre (NESAC) covers the specific requirements of Types of remote sensing data for pollution monitoring
the northeast region, whereas the Ahmedabad based Different data types are used in remote sensing
space application centre (SAC) emphasized on sensor applications for pollution monitoring, which have
development. Remote sensing technology also used specific advantages to identify soil and water
in research institute and agricultural universities like contaminations.
Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (CSSRI), Karnal
• Optical data: Visible and near infrared (VNIR)
and Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana Agricultural
and shortwave infrared (SWIR) which have a
University (CCS HAU), Karnal to investigate the water
wavelength (450—1350 nm) can be used to detect
quality and salinity parameters including estimation
data for identifying vegetation indices, some
of areas under salt-affected soils. Organization such
soil contaminants and sedimentation. Amount
National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee and
of reflected sunlight captured by these sensors
Central Water Commission (CWC) utilize leverage
satellite data for hydrological modelling and real-time which changes according to the type and level of
pollution monitoring. contaminants present.
20 Indian Farming
November 2025
Source: Image taken from: The basics of the electromagnetic spectrum: https://leadertechinc.com/basics-electromagnetic-spectrum/
This figure explain the electromagnetic spectrum hyperspectral imaging work especially well because
with different wavelength and frequency, which are it can records wider spectrum of wavelengths. In
used in remote sensing applications for examining the particular, Sentinel-2 and Landsat imagery have
surface characteristics of vegetation indices and thermal been used to recognize unique spectral patterns of
radiation. contaminated soils.
• Thermal infrared (TIR) data: It detects temperature On the image, groundwater level monitoring using RS
irregularities in water bodies that could be caused and GIS methods, red spots on the heatmap illustrates
by thermal pollution or industrial effluent. When the critically low water levels, most likely as a result of
soil moisture or temperature characteristics changes, pollution or over-extraction, while green spots denoting
thermal infrared data identifies the organic pollution. stable levels. These kind of visualizations are curtail
• Microwave and radar data: Synthetic Aperture for pinpointing the hotspot for groundwater stress and
Radar (SAR) and other microwave sensors can directing effective water resource management and
penetrate the cloud cover to gather information on pollution reduction strategies.
soil moisture and structural changes in the terrain, • Estimating the soil salinity: One common type
which could point to chemical spills or other of soil contamination that has a direct effect on
disruptions. agricultural productivity is soil salinity. Large-
scale mapping and assessment of salinity levels are
Applications of remote sensing in soil pollution monitoring and made with the help of remote sensing techniques,
management including those which evaluate reflectance pattern
Remote sensing has numerous important applications
that allows us for detection, tracking and manage soil
pollution:
• Heavy metals and contaminants detection:
Remote sensing can identify spectrum variations
in soils that include heavy metals contaminants
like cadmium, arsenic and lead. For this purpose,
Source: Image adopted from role of geo-spatial technology
Source: Image adopted from Scientific reports: A longitudinal analysis
(GIS) in water resource management:https://www.sgligis.
of soil salinity changes using remotely sensed imageries: https://www.
com/gis-for-water-resource/
nature.com/articles/s41598-024-60033-6
Indian Farming 21
November 2025
in visible and near infrared (VNIR) and shortwave • Review of water quality parameters: Now a
infrared (SWIR) electromagnetic spectrum. days, algorithms are developed to evaluate
The figure represents the spatial distribution maps of concentrations of turbidity, water quality indicators
soil electrical conductivity (ds/m). The colour gradient like chlorophyll-a, dissolved organic matter and
of map (a,b,c, and d) from green (low salinity), to red many more of these parameters from satellite data,
(high salinity) shows changes in the EC throughout the enabling real time monitoring
research area. These results illustrate how well satellite
imagery helps to identify and monitor soil salinity at Advances in remote sensing technologies for pollution
management
regional scales, supporting ecological management and
• Hyperspectral imaging: Advancement with time in
precision farming.
hyperspectral sensors has provided high spectral
• Monitoring agricultural runoff: Soil and water
resolution data, helping identification of precise
pollution can result in excessive use of fertilizer,
pollutants and contamination types. With increase in
pesticides and weedicides. By employing vegetation
spatial resolution the opportunity of hyperspectral
indices such as Normalised Difference Vegetation
imaging in distinguishing heavy metals and other
index (NDVI) to monitor the crop stress brought
pollutants is more precised.
on by chemical usage or excessive nutrients, remote
• Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs): Drones equipped
Sensing is able to track and detect the expansion of
with high-resolution sensors are revolutionizing
chemical contaminants from agricultural runoff.
localized pollution monitoring by offering greater
flexibility in data collection and enabling coverage
Applications of remote sensing in water pollution monitoring and
of areas that satellites cannot reach.
management
• Machine learning in image processing: Introduction
Remote sensing proposes numerous approaches to
of artificial intelligence in remote sensing has
examine water quality, identify pollutants, and assess
significantly improved the accuracy of pollution
the ecological effects of water pollution:
detection in water. For instance, algorithms like
• Observing suspended solids and turbidity: Higher
Random Forest, Convolutional Neural Networks
level of suspended solids and turbidity often
(CNNs) are being used to classify contaminated soils,
indicate water pollution from residue runoff,
map water quality, and assess pollution impacts.
industrial discharges, or algal blooms. Remote
sensors like MODIS and Landsat can monitor
SUMMARY
changes in water reflectance, helping perceive
The monitoring and control of soil and water
turbidity levels.
contamination through remote sensing, which provides
• Algal bloom detection: Harmful algal blooms an efficient and cost-effective method to access the
(HABs) are a significant water pollution issue, often environmental health on an extensive scale. Remote
triggered by excessive nutrient runoff. Remote sensing is still developing and providing essential
sensing can detect algal blooms and track their information for sustainable management and pollution
spread and severity by analyzing chlorophyll from control strategies from hyperspectral imaging to
satellite imagery. sophisticated machine learning algorithms. By
• Revealing of organic and chemical pollutants: combining remote sensing with field data and cutting-
With the help of thermal and hyperspectral sensors edge technologies, pollution problems can be managed
certain pollutants can be identified due to their more efficiently assisting with environmental protection
change in the thermal and spectral properties of and resource sustainability initiatives.
water. Remote sensing not only track temperature
anomalies but also indicates potential thermal
*Corresponding author email: krishantaneja24@gmail.com
pollution and water waste expulsion.
22 Indian Farming
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 23-26; November 2025
Mustard and salinity tolerance:
A resilient oilseed for the future
Archana Watts1*, Shaswati Sardar1, Silky Gandhi1, Anshul Watts2,
Pranjal Yadava1, Soham Ray1 and Shivani Nagar1
1ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 110 012
2ICAR-National Institute of Plant Biotechnology, New Delhi 110 012
Salinity is one of the major abiotic stresses limiting crop production and productivity, particularly
in the arid and semi-arid regions of India. Indian mustard (Brassica juncea), a leading oilseed
crop valued for its culinary and medicinal properties, is highly susceptible to salt stress, which
causes significant yield losses. The adverse effects include reduced seed germination, stunted plant
growth, decreased seed yield, and a decline in oil content. Exploring the genetic variation within
mustard germplasm offers opportunities for developing salt-tolerant cultivars. A comprehensive
understanding of morphological, physiological, and molecular mechanisms underlying salt
tolerance is crucial for this purpose. Strategies such as exploiting existing germplasm, adopting
improved breeding techniques, implementing effective agronomic practices, and applying
advanced technologies like genome editing hold great potential for enhancing salt tolerance in
mustard. Integration of conventional breeding with modern genomic tools and genome-editing
approaches will facilitate the identification and functional validation of key candidate genes and
regulatory networks, thereby accelerating the development of resilient mustard cultivars for saline
environments.
Keywords: Crop improvement, Genome editing, Indian mustard, Salinity stress, Salt tolerance mechanism
INDIAN mustard (Brassica juncea) is one of the major ultimately reducing seed yield and oil quality. To
oilseed crops of India, valued for its high demand in address this issue, salt-tolerant varieties such as CS60
edible oil production. It offers significant nutritional and CS58 have been developed by ICAR-Central Soil
and economic benefits and remains a preferred cooking Salinity Research Institute (ICAR-CSSRI), Karnal. These
oil in eastern India, including the states of Bihar, West genotypes have demonstrated superior seed and oil
Bengal, Odisha, Jharkhand, as well as Rajasthan, Punjab, yields compared to other widely cultivated varieties like
and Madhya Pradesh. Edible oils derived from Indian CS54, Kranti, and Giriraj under saline conditions.
mustard contribute approximately 27.8% to the country’s Given the escalating problem of soil salinization,
total oilseed economy. Despite its versatile applications exacerbated by climate change, unsustainable irrigation
and substantial contribution to India’s agricultural practices, and excessive fertilizer application, it is
economy, the nation continues to rely on the import imperative to investigate the physiological, biochemical,
of edible oils. This dependence is primarily attributed and molecular mechanisms underlying salinity
to the low productivity of mustard crops, which suffer tolerance in mustard. Such insights will be pivotal
significant yield losses due to abiotic stresses driven for developing improved, climate-resilient cultivars
by changing climatic conditions and deteriorating soil capable of sustaining productivity in salt-affected agro-
health. Among these challenges, soil salinity poses a ecosystems.
serious constraint, particularly in regions with low
annual rainfall, poor-quality irrigation, and suboptimal Impact of salinity on mustard cultivation
land management practices. Salinity adversely affects Soil salinity is a major constraint affecting the
mustard by impairing seed germination, vegetative productivity of Indian mustard crops, particularly in
growth, photosynthetic efficiency, lipid accumulation, poorly irrigated, arid, and semi-arid regions. It results
Indian Farming 23
November 2025
from the excessive accumulation of soluble salts, mustard plants accumulate osmoprotectants such
primarily sodium chloride (NaCl), in the soil. Saline as proline, glycine betaine, and polyamines. These
soils are characterized by elevated concentrations of compatible solutes help maintain cellular osmotic
various salts, including sodium, calcium, magnesium, balance and protect cellular structures under saline
potassium, carbonates, bicarbonates, chlorides, conditions.
sulphates, borates, and lithium compounds. • Antioxidative defense system: Salinity-induced
The excessive build-up of these salts disrupts plant oxidative stress is alleviated through the enhanced
water uptake, leading to reduced growth, wilting, and, activity of antioxidative enzymes, including
ultimately, plant mortality. High salt concentrations superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), and
impair seed germination and hinder seedling peroxidases (POD). Additionally, the introduction
establishment, resulting in poor field emergence and and expression of the codA gene encoding choline
reduced plant populations. Additionally, salinity oxidase from Arthrobacter globiformis in B. rapa
disturbs the nutrient balance within plants. The spp. have been shown to improve photosynthetic
accumulation of sodium (Na⁺) and chloride (Cl⁻) ions efficiency under high salinity stress by enhancing
interferes with the uptake of essential nutrients such oxidative stress tolerance.
as potassium (K⁺) and calcium (Ca²⁺), causing nutrient • Ion homeostasis and transport regulation: Mustard
imbalances and subsequent physiological disorders. plants maintain ionic balance by regulating ion
Salinity also raises osmotic potential of the soil, inducing transport and minimizing toxic sodium (Na⁺)
osmotic stress that limits water availability to plants. This accumulation. This is achieved through the action of
stress promotes the overproduction of reactive oxygen ion transporters and antiporters such as SOS1, SOS2,
species (ROS), leading to oxidative damage to cellular SOS3, ENH, and NHX proteins, which play pivotal
structures and metabolic dysfunctions. Moreover, roles in maintaining intracellular ion homeostasis
salinity negatively affects photosynthetic efficiency by and nutrient balance under saline conditions.
reducing chlorophyll content and impairing enzyme Harnessing these adaptive traits through systematic
activities associated with photosynthesis, thereby germplasm evaluation and targeted breeding strategies
severely limiting plant growth and yield. holds promise for developing high-yielding, salt-tolerant
Oil quality in mustard is also compromised under mustard cultivars suitable for saline and marginal agro-
saline conditions, as salt stress alters the fatty acid ecosystems.
composition of the oil, diminishing both its commercial
value and nutritional properties. Interestingly, B. juncea
has demonstrated potential for phytoremediation of
metal-contaminated saline soils, garnering attention as a
candidate for sustainable agriculture and soil restoration
strategies. Given these challenges, it is crucial to develop
salt-tolerant mustard genotypes and systematically
explore existing germplasm resources to identify and
harness naturally occurring salinity tolerance traits for
breeding programmes and crop improvement initiatives.
Mustard’s natural salinity tolerance mechanisms
Mustard exhibits low to moderate salt tolerance,
attributed to several inherent adaptive mechanisms.
Natural genetic variation for salinity tolerance exists
within the extensive germplasm collections of mustard,
offering valuable resources for crop improvement. It
is essential to identify and select elite germplasm with
superior adaptability to varying climatic and saline
conditions through conventional breeding approaches.
In this context, ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research
Institute (CSSRI), Karnal has reported several mustard
genotypes exhibiting moderate to high salinity tolerance
with minimal yield compromise under salt-affected
environments. Several physiological, biochemical, and
molecular traits contribute to the ability of mustard
plants to withstand soil salinity:
• Deep root system: Certain mustard germplasm
possesses deeper root architectures, enabling plants
to access water from subsoil layers while avoiding
the detrimental effects of surface salt accumulation.
• Osmotic adjustment: To mitigate osmotic stress, Variation in the root length in mustard germplasm
24 Indian Farming
November 2025
Strategies for enhancing salinity tolerance in mustard AFLP, SSR, and SNP, which reveal polymorphism
To reduce the nation’s dependence on edible and are closely associated with genes or
oil imports and safeguard the national economy, quantitative trait loci (QTLs) governing salinity
it is essential to achieve self-sufficiency in oilseed tolerance. Marker-assisted selection allows for the
production, particularly mustard. In light of increasing precise identification of plants carrying desirable
soil salinization and unpredictable climatic conditions, alleles, bypassing the need for time-consuming
the development of salt-tolerant, high-yielding mustard
and labour-intensive phenotypic screening under
varieties has become a priority. Several strategies can
saline conditions. Furthermore, marker-assisted
be employed to enhance salinity tolerance in mustard
backcross breeding (MABC) can be applied to
crops:
introgress identified salt tolerance QTLs into
• Conventional breeding: Significant genetic
high-yielding, salt-sensitive genetic backgrounds,
variability for salinity tolerance exists within local
thereby combining salinity resilience with desirable
landraces, wild relatives, and traditional mustard
agronomic traits.
cultivars. Systematic identification and selection
• Genome editing using CRISPR/Cas technology:
of elite germplasm under saline and adverse
Genome editing offers a precise and efficient
climatic conditions can lead to the discovery of
approach to enhance stress tolerance traits in
naturally tolerant lines. These tolerant genotypes
mustard. The CRISPR/Cas9 system enables targeted
can be characterized and evaluated in salt-affected
modification of genes by utilizing a 20 bp single-
soils to assess their adaptability and agronomic
performance. Subsequently, selected tolerant lines guide RNA (sgRNA) specific to the gene of interest.
can be hybridized with high-yielding but salt- The Cas9 nuclease introduces a double-strand
sensitive cultivars to develop superior varieties with break near the Protospacer Adjacent Motif (PAM)
enhanced salinity tolerance through conventional sequence, and during the DNA repair process,
breeding approaches. insertions, deletions, or targeted modifications are
• Marker-assisted selection (MAS): The existing introduced. In mustard, CRISPR/Cas9 technology
genetic variability in mustard can be efficiently can be utilized to target key genes involved in ion
exploited using molecular markers such as RFLP, transport (e.g. SOS1, NHX), osmoregulation (e.g.
proline and glycine betaine biosynthesis
pathways), and antioxidative defense
mechanisms, thereby improving plant’s
resilience to salinity stress.
Strategies to develop salt tolerance mustard
variety
• Agronomic practices and
nanotechnology: In addition to genetic
improvement, integrated agronomic
strategies can play a critical role in
managing salinity stress. Intercropping
mustard with salt-tolerant cover crops
can reduce surface soil salinity and
improve soil structure. Application of soil
amendments such as gypsum, organic
matter, and biochar helps neutralize
excessive salts, enhancing soil fertility
and water-holding capacity. Adoption of
efficient irrigation methods, such as drip
or alternate furrow irrigation, minimizes
salt accumulation near the root zone.
Utilization of plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria (PGPR) and arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) enhances
nutrient uptake, root growth, and stress
tolerance under saline conditions.Recent
advancements in nanotechnology have
introduced the application of nano-
encapsulated nutrients and engineered
nanoparticles, which improve nutrient
absorption, physiological efficiency, and
Strategies to develop salt tolerance mustard variety plant growth under saline environments.
Indian Farming 25
November 2025
SUMMARY of the genetic basis of salinity tolerance but also facilitate
Indian mustard is a moderately resilient crop that the development of molecular markers and gene targets
requires relatively less irrigation and can tolerate for breeding programmes focused on improving salinity
moderate levels of soil salinity, making it a promising resilience in mustard.
crop for cultivation in salt-affected areas. However, to To achieve this, it is crucial to integrate conventional
fully harness its potential, extensive reservoir of mustard breeding approaches with modern biotechnological
germplasm must be systematically explored to identify tools and sustainable agronomic practices. Advanced
genotypes with superior resilience and adaptability to technologies such as genome editing, in combination
saline soils, without compromising seed yield or oil with omics-based approaches including genomics,
quality. There are relatively few reports available on the transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics hold
identification of novel genes and quantitative trait loci immense potential to unravel the complex mechanisms
underlying salinity tolerance. The integration of these
(QTLs) associated with salinity tolerance in mustard.
cutting-edge tools can accelerate the development of
Limited genetic and molecular information constrains
high-yielding, salt-tolerant mustard cultivars, thereby
the development of salt-tolerant cultivars through
revolutionizing mustard cultivation in salt-affected
molecular breeding and biotechnological approaches.
agro-ecosystems and contributing to the nation’s edible
Therefore, there is a pressing need for comprehensive
oil security.
studies aimed at identifying and characterizing salt-
responsive genes, QTLs, and regulatory networks in
*Corresponding author email: archana@iari.res.in
mustard. This will not only advance our understanding
Handbook of
Agricultural Engineering
“The 2nd revised edition will empower researchers with up-to-date knowledge
on cutting-edge technologies like AI and precision agriculture, enabling them
to develop innovative solutions. It will serve as a crucial bridge between
research, education, industry and policy, fostering a more sustainable and
technologically advanced agriculture sector. This handbook is meticulously
structured into five sections, covering crucial topics such as Farm Machinery
and Power, Soil and Water Engineering, Energy in Agriculture, Agro-process
Engineering and Natural Fibers Engineering and Technology. Each section
provides both theoretical knowledge & practical insights. It will be useful for the
farmers, students, researchers, extension workers, policymakers, entrepreneurs,
practitioners and other stakeholders.
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
Pages: 1188; Price: ` 2000.00, US$ 300.00; Postage: `200
ISBN No.: 978-81-7164-286-1
For obtaining copies, please contact:
Business Unit
ICAR-Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture
SCAN QR Code to
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan – I, Pusa, New Delhi 110012 Purchase Online
Tel: 011-25843657; email: businessuniticar@gmail.com
website: www.icar.org.in
26 Indian Farming
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 27-30; November 2025
Cut-soiler-preferential shallow
subsurface drainage (PSSD):
A novel technique of salinity management with no residue burning
Gajender Yadav1*, Neha1,2, R. K. Yadav1, Govind Prasad1,
A. K. Rai1and Junya Onishi2
1ICAR₋Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
2Japan International Research Center for Agricultural Sciences (JIRCAS), Japan
Soil salinization is a major cause of land degradation in irrigated areas, often reducing productivity
and forcing field abandonment. Salinity build-up in the root zone results from saline irrigation,
shallow groundwater, weathering, and poor drainage. Conventional measures such as leaching and
drainage installation have limitations due to high cost and technical constraints. A novel method,
cut-soiler based Preferential Shallow Subsurface Drainage (PSSD), offers an effective alternative.
The tractor-operated cut-soiler uses surface residues as filling material to construct shallow
(40–60 cm) drains that promote preferential removal of water and salts while simultaneously
managing residues without burning. Cut-soiler was introduced in India under Japan International
Research Centre for Agricultural Sciences (JIRCAS)-ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute
(ICAR-CSSRI) collaborative research project. The findings of evaluation studies on salt removal
effect of cut-soiler PSSD suggested that it can reduce soil salinity upto 60% in a semi controlled
lysimeter simulation study and upto 50% in the field condition in three years. The subsequent effect
of desalination on performances of tested crops is prominent and consistent. Unlike conventional
subsurface drainage, it is low-cost, farmer-friendly, and can be applied at the individual farm level,
making it a promising option for sustainable salinity and residue management.
Keywords: Cut-soiler, Drainage, PSSD, Salt affected soil, Salinization
THE Sustainable Development Goals emphasize sodic and 397 million hectares are saline. In India,
the need to enhance food production, restore soil approximately 6.7 million hectares are classified as salt-
and ecosystem health, improve water management, affected, while 32–84% of groundwater resources are
and address climate challenges by promoting the considered unsuitable due to poor quality.
multifunctional use of natural resources within their In India, salt-affected soils have been present since
ecological limits, thereby preventing further land time immemorial but recorded evidences are available
degradation. Among the major drivers of desertification only after middle of 19th century when salinization
and land deterioration, salinization is regarded as a started adversely affecting crop yields and economic
critical environmental threat, leading to both ecological well-being of people and system ecology. The problem
imbalance and economic losses. The problem of salt has origin in natural processes as well as secondary
accumulation in soils and water bodies has become a human induced factors. Presently the salt-affected soils
major barrier to sustainable agriculture, particularly exist in fourteen states and one union territory of the
in arid and semi-arid regions, where it restricts crop country. In the coming years, the extent of salt-affected
productivity. Globally, salt-affected soils are distributed soils is likely to expand due to factors such as secondary
across more than 100 countries, covering an estimated salinization in canal command and lift-irrigation areas,
835 million hectares of which 438 million hectares are greater reliance on poor-quality water in semi-arid and
IInnddiiaann FFaarrmmiinngg 2277
NNoovveemmbbeerr 22002255
arid zones, seawater intrusion driven by climate change, Corporation, Japan (Patented in 2017). Cut-soiler was
and the growing practice of brackish water aquaculture introduced in India under JIRCAS and ICAR-CSSRI
in coastal regions. collaborative research project on sustainable resource
The challenge of salinity is becoming more severe, management system for waterlogged and saline arid
particularly in poorly drained soils with high salt regions of India. The project envisages evaluation, utility
content. Addressing this issue requires a practical, and standardization of this approach on salt leaching and
farm-level technology that individual farmers can easily nutrient dynamics in the field and lysimeter conditions.
adopt. The cut-soiler approach, which provides a low- Features and specifications of cut-soiler: It is mainly
cost preferential drainage system, offers a promising consisted of cutter blade and sled gauge. The cutter is
and economical option for the long-term management working like a chisel plough that cut and lift the soil
of salt-affected soils. to open up space to insert filling material. The sled
gauge is a whirling shaft that hard sweeps the surface
Overview of cut-soiler residue and places it into the space opened by cutter.
Development background and history: The cut- The cutter shaft is slightly slanting in such a way that
soiler is a tractor-operated implement designed to the lifted soil filled back in the open space over the
utilize surface residues such as straw, stems, and other filling material (residue) without inverting the soil. The
plant remains to create preferential shallow subsurface working cylinder is provided for the hydraulic lifting
drainage (PSSD) channels as it moves across the movement using tractor power. The depth control wheel
field. This system simultaneously addresses the dual is to control the depth of drain constructed by cut-soiler.
challenges of waterlogging and salinity while providing The specifications of the cut-soiler along with its tractor
an effective means of residue management. The drainage power requirements are dimensions (LxWxH): 2.0 m x
channels function through water flow, generally about 1.5 m x 1.65 m and weighs 800 kg. following are some
60 cm deep, and exhibit discharge efficiency comparable recommendations:
to conventional main drains. The technology has been • Tractor capacity required: 60–120 HP
successfully applied in practice, and farmers can • Recommended operating speed: 2–3 km/h
establish these drains quickly and conveniently without • Material treatment: maximum 10 cm length
requiring specialized materials. • Construction depth: 40–60 cm
Cut-soiler has been developed and put into Operation mechanism of cut-soiler: The cut-soiler
commercial use jointly by National Agriculture and operates by cut the soil to create a V-shaped furrow.
Food Research Organization (NARO) and Hokkai Koki During this process, the soil is lifted, and surface residues
Working cylinder
Adjust rod
Sled Gauge
Depth Control wheel
Cutter
Cut-soiler machine
Cut-soiler operation in the field
28 Indian Farming
November 2025
Scattered straw, residue
Surface soil
Sub-soil
Mechanism of cut-soiler operation for preferential shallow sub-surface drainage construction
such as straw and plant material are placed at the base of • It is advisable to adjust the depth of the cut-soiler
the furrow before the excavated soil is returned. These drains by depth control wheel before running in the
constructed lines act as shallow subsurface drainage field according to the depth of sodic layer presence
channels, effectively reducing surface waterlogging or required depth of drainage.
and mitigating soil salinity. The accompanying figure
illustrates the working mechanism of the Cut-soiler in Advantages
establishing these drains. • Cut-soiler PSSD construction does not require any
Cut-soiler can also place the soil reclamation extra material of machinery, hence, it is low cost
amendments like gypsum along with residue at sub- in operation and no requirement of large area or
surface and thus a practical technique to reclaim sub- community approach as it can be used by individual
surface sodicity. Cut-soiler can manage the complete farmer.
surface rice residue (upto 6 t/ha) by placing it to sub • It uses surface left over surface scattered residue
surface in a single tractor operation, hence an effective
after combine harvest as filling material, so may
tool to reduce the residue burning problem of rice-
help in reducing residue burning.
wheat belt of IGP.
• Placing crop residues at the base of the cut-soiler
furrow contributes to carbon sequestration and
Precautions during construction of cut-soiler PSSD
enhances overall soil health.
• To maintain the desired lateral distance between
• The cut-soiler drains being shallow, helps in
drain lines and enhance water and salt outflow, the
reducing drainage effluent volume.
tractor should be run straight in the direction of the
• It is a viable technique for the placement of
natural slope.
reclamation amendment at sub surface, so helpful
• The filler material, such as crop residue, should be
in managing sub-surface sodicity.
evenly spread on the ground and preferably be 8–10
cm in size. The larger size residue can clog, disrupt
Limitations
the consistency of cut-soiler action, and diminish
• Higher tractor power requirement.
the tractor pulling capacity.
• Requirement for additional hydraulic point in
• To ensure uniform depth of cut-soiler constructed
tractor for better lifting.
drains, the field should be laser leveled with a 2%
• An initial hand on training is required for operating,
slope oriented toward the main drain, the tractor
handling procedure, functions, and precautions
should operate at constant slow speed (2—4 km/h)
during the operation.
and the PTO (power take-off) rotates continuously.
• The quality of the straw/residues utilised determines
Pilot studies on performance evaluation of cut-soiler PSSD
stability and durability cut-soiler drain. However,
Studies at ICAR-CSSRI, Karnal, demonstrated the
channels made with rice straw residue were effective
for around three years. effectiveness of cut-soiler based PSSD in lowering soil
• The recommended lateral spacing between two salinity through a semi-controlled lysimeter setup where
adjacent cut-soiler drainage channels ranges drains were constructed manually. Results showed that
from 2.5–5.0 m. (depending on soil type and field this system decreased soil salinity by 50–60% within
conditions). two years across different soil types. The extent of
• Each cut-soiler lateral drain must linked to the main desalinization varied depending on soil texture, the
drain line to lay off drained water from the field. quality of irrigation water, and seasonal rainfall patterns.
• In case of placement of reclamation amendments The PSSD facilitated greater discharge of excess water
into soil sub-surface, the amendment (Gypsum) and dissolved salts immediately after irrigation and
should spread homogeneously over rice straw after rainfall events. Notably, irrigation water with salinity
cutting it into finer lengths using the mulcher. levels up to 8.0 dS/m could be applied without causing
Indian Farming 29
November 2025
irrigation water with salinity levels up to 12.0 dS/m
Initial
could be utilized under this drainage method without
contributing to additional salt accumulation.
A field experiment was carried out in Bhudhmor
village (Patiala, Punjab), where the cut-soiler machine
was used to place gypsum and rice residues at different
lateral intervals for reclaiming by 23.77%, 14.92%, and
5.95% at lateral spacings of 0.30 m, 0.60 m, and 1.25 m,
respectively. When gypsum and rice straw residues were
incorporated at a depth of 40 cm crop productivity also
improved under this system, with rice and wheat yields
showing increases of 16% and 15.5% at 2.5 m spacing,
and 6% and 10.7% at 5.0 m spacing, compared with the
Cut-soiler No Cut-soiler 12 dS/m
control treatment (without cut-soiler intervention).
SUMMARY
The cut-soiler PSSD presents a promising approach
additional salt accumulation. Improved soil conditions,
for managing both soil salinity and surface residues.
combining lower salinity with favourable moisture
This preferential subsurface drainage system offers
availability, enhanced crop performance. In pearl millet,
a practical solution to minimize salt build-up and can
grain yield increased by 23.54% and biological yield by
be implemented at the individual farm level in a single
12.64%. Similarly, mustard showed yield improvements
operation. Unlike conventional subsurface drainage,
of 31.4% in seed, 14.41% in straw, and 18.08% in
it does not require heavy machinery, high investment,
biological output.
collective participation, or the complex handling of
The effectiveness of cut-soiler PSSD in salt removal
large volumes of saline effluents. However, additional
and salinity management was also proved in the field
research is necessary to clearly establish its long-term
validation trial at representative salt affected site at
influence on soil water and salt dynamics, as well as
village Nain (Panipat), Haryana. In this study, upto 52%
its economic feasibility under different soil textures,
reduction in soil salinity (ECe) was recorded with cut-
varying irrigation water salinity, and diverse types of
soiler PSSD at 2.5 m lateral interval. In this study, cut-
crop residues, to ensure sustainable management of
soiler drains were installed at a depth of 60 cm, with
salt-affected soils.
rice residue applied as a filling material at the rate of
6 Mg/ha. The system resulted in a 50% increase
*Corresponding author email: gajender.icar@gmail.com
in mustard yield. Moreover, it was observed that
30 Indian Farming
November 2025
)m/Sd
eCE(ytinilas
lioS
Final
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
4 dS/m 8 dS/m
Effect of cut-soiler PSSD and varying saline irrigation
water on soil salinity reduction over two years
Textbook of
Water Harvesting and Soil Conservation Structures
This textbook contains 13 chapters dealing with the content related to water harvesting-
definition, history, benefits, methodologies etc. Each chapter has been supported by
figures and tables at pertinent place. Furthermore, the practical-wise important points
have also been cited in the textbook for updating the students about the course. This
book will be a valuable knowledge resource for students, professors and the professional
associated to the Water Harvesting and Soil Conservation across the country.
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
Pages: v + 376; Price: ` 1000.00, US$ 150.00; Postage: `100
ISBN No.: 978-81-7164-288-5
For obtaining copies, please contact:
SCAN QR Code to
Business Unit Purchase Online
ICAR-Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan – I, Pusa, New Delhi 110012
Tel: 011-25843657; email: businessuniticar@gmail.com
website: www.icar.org.in
Indian Farming 75 (11): 31-35; November 2025
Integrated sustainable farming model
for saline and sodic soils
Rajkumar, Suresh Kumar, Ram Kishor Fagodia, Awtar Singh and Nirmal Singh*
ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
Saline and sodic soils significantly limit agricultural productivity due to their high salt and sodium
content, which negatively affect soil health and crop growth. This article explores the effectiveness
of integrated sustainable farming systems (IFS) in mitigating these challenges and enhancing farm
productivity in affected regions. By combining crop diversification, efficient water management,
livestock integration, and agroforestry, IFS promotes resource recycling, improves soil fertility,
and maintains ecological balance. The adoption of these holistic practices results in enhanced
biodiversity, climate resilience, and economic sustainability for smallholder farmers. Case studies
from the Indo-Gangetic Plains highlight that enterprise diversification within IFS increases food
and nutritional security, reduces environmental degradation, and boosts farm profitability. Despite
challenges like limited funding and resource availability, integrated farming presents a viable
solution for sustainable agriculture on saline and sodic soils, supporting both farmer livelihoods
and long-term soil conservation.
Keywords: Climate resilience, Enterprise diversification, Integrated farming system
(IFS), Nutritional security, Resource recycling, salt affected soils
SALINE and alkaline soils pose significant challenges Constraints of present agriculture
to agricultural productivity worldwide. These soils • Reduction in agriculture growth rate
are characterized by significant quantities of soluble • Reduction in factor productivity
salts as well as sodium ions, which adversely affect plant • Increasing malnutrition
growth and soil fertility. Traditional farming practices • Increasing environment pollution
often exacerbate soil salinity and sodicity, leading • Increasing cost of production
to reduced yields and environmental degradation. • Depleting ground water table
However, integrated sustainable farming models offer
promising solutions to mitigate these challenges while Difference between IFS and mixed farming
promoting agricultural productivity and environmental IFS is that enterprise which is mutually supportive
stewardship. Saline and sodic soils are types of soil and depend on each other. Mixed farming system
degradation characterized by high concentrations of consists of components such as crops and livestock that
salts. Saline soils contain soluble salts such as sodium coexist independently from each other. In this farming,
chloride (NaCl), while sodic soils have elevated levels of integrating crops and livestock serves primarily to
exchangeable sodium ions (Na+). These salts adversely minimize the risk and not to recycle resources. Whereas
affect soil structure and fertility, posing significant in an IFS, crops and livestock interact to create a synergy,
challenges to agricultural productivity. with recycling allowing the maximum use of available
resources.
Importance of addressing saline/sodic soils
• Ensuring the viability of agricultural land for future Advantages of IFS
generations Enhanced resource efficiency: Integrated farming
• Mitigating the environmental impacts of soil maximizes resource use by recycling nutrients, water,
degradation, including salinization of water bodies and energy within the system. Livestock waste serves
• Enhancing the risk-bearing capacity of farming as organic fertilizer for crops, reducing synthetic inputs,
communities to climate change and market price while crop residues feed livestock. Manure recycling and
fluctuation biogas generation further minimize waste. Diversifying
Indian Farming 31
November 2025
crops and livestock improves land, labour, and capital Economic viability: IFS improve economic
use, boosting productivity and benefit₋cost ratio. sustainability by diversifying income sources and
Water-saving practices like drip irrigation, rainwater lowering production costs. Alongside crop sales, farmers
harvesting, and recycling enhance efficiency, helping earn from livestock, agroforestry products, aquaculture,
farmers manage scarcity and drought conditions. and value-added ventures like agro-tourism and farm-
Improved soil health and fertility: IFS improves to-table sales. Reduced reliance on external inputs and
soil health by adding organic matter and through crop efficient resource use increase returns and buffer against
rotation and cover cropping, which improve structure, market and price volatility. Enterprise integration—
nutrient cycling, and erosion control. Crop-livestock crops, milk, eggs, mushrooms, honey, silkworm
integration returns nutrients to the soil via grazing on cocoons—ensures year-round cash flow.
residues and cover crops, boosting fertility. Agroforestry Community engagement and social benefits: IFS
stabilizes soil, curbs erosion, and increases carbon encourage community participation, fostering social
sequestration, creating resilient soils. Efficient recycling cohesion and rural growth. Shared knowledge, resources,
of organic fertilizers, residues, and manure reduces and labour help communities tackle challenges and
synthetic fertilizer use and nutrient runoff, minimizing improve livelihoods. Combining crops with livestock
water pollution risks. increases labor demand, reducing underemployment in
Biodiversity conservation: Integrated farming, by rural areas.
combining multiple crops, trees, and livestock, increases
biodiversity on agricultural lands. This supports Objectives of integrated farming systems
beneficial insects, pollinators, and soil microbes, • To recognize the current farming systems, present
strengthening ecosystem health and resilience. in a particular area and evaluate their comparative
Pest and disease management: Diversified farming viability.
disturbs pest and disease cycles by reducing monoculture • To develop farming system models that integrate
and promoting ecological balance. Mixed cropping primary and supplementary enterprises tailored to
and habitats for beneficial insects provide natural pest various farming conditions.
control, minimizing chemical use. Livestock integration • To promote the optimal use and conservation
helps manage pests and weeds through grazing and of available resources while ensuring efficient
interrupting their life cycles. recycling of farm residues within the system.
Climate resilience: IFS boost resilience to climate • To sustain production systems in a way that does
variability through diversified cropping and agroforestry, not harm the resource base or the environment
which protect against drought, floods, and temperature
• To enhance the overall profitability of farm
extremes. Conservation agriculture and water harvesting
households by harmonizing main and allied
improve soil moisture retention, reduce runoff, and
enterprises to complement one another.
lessen climate change impacts on productivity.
Environmental conservation: IFS conserves
Ideal situations for introduction of IFS
biodiversity by creating diverse habitats through
• When the farmer aims to enhance the quality of
agroforestry, hedgerows, and riparian buffers,
farm production.
supporting varied plant and animal species. Reduced
• When the farmer's household is facing difficulties in
pesticide and fertilizer use lowers pollution and
affording sufficient food.
safeguards water quality, while prioritizing ecological
• When there is water storage available on the farm,
balance and protecting natural resources from negative
such as ponds.
farming impacts.
IFS model for smallholder farmers with around two-hectare land area
32 Indian Farming
November 2025
Principles of IFS
Components of integrated farming system 1. Diversification of crops: Crop diversification, as
opposed to monocropping, involves cultivating
multiple species with varied nutrient needs and
growth characteristics to maintain soil health. This
approach breaks pest and disease cycles, improves
soil structure, and strengthens farming system
resilience to stresses such as salinity and sodicity. For
instance, integrating salt-tolerant crops like quinoa,
barley, or specific rice and wheat varieties alongside
traditional crops can enhance soil management in
saline or sodic areas.
2. Efficient water management: Efficient water
management techniques in farming focus on
optimizing water use, minimizing wastage, and
preventing waterlogging that worsens soil salinity
and sodicity. Methods such as drip irrigation deliver
water directly to plant roots, reducing evaporation
and salt buildup, while precision farming applies
water only where and when needed to conserve
resources. Proper water management helps mitigate
salinity/sodicity effects, enhances crop productivity,
and lowers agriculture’s environmental impact.
Techniques like rainwater harvesting and recycling
• When the farmer intends to maximize profits from supplement irrigation, reducing reliance on
the current landholding. groundwater in saline and sodic regions.
• When the farmer is motivated to minimize 3. Soil health improvement: Soil health improvement
environmental pollution. aims to enhance fertility, structure, and biological
Table 1. Enterprises linked in different agro-ecosystem activity, which are vital for sustainable crop
production. Techniques like composting, green
Dry Agro- Farm
Dairy Poultry Goat/sheep manuring, and vermiculture increase soil organic
land forestry pond
matter, boosting nutrient and water retention.
Healthy soils are more resilient to salinity and
Garden Bee
Dairy Poultry Mushroom Piggery Sericulture
land Keeping sodicity stresses and support diverse microbial
communities that aid nutrient cycling and plant
Wet health. For example, incorporating cover crops
Dairy Poultry Mushroom Fishery Duckery
land
and legumes in rotations fixes nitrogen, improves
soil structure, and reduces erosion in saline/sodic
Types of IFS conditions.
Crop-based IFS: Crop production is the main 4. Integration of livestock: Integrating livestock
activity, complemented by livestock, agroforestry, or into farming systems creates synergies between
aquaculture to recycle organic waste, improve resource crop and animal production, enhancing nutrient
use, and boost productivity. cycling and soil fertility. Livestock supply manure
Livestock-based IFS: Livestock rearing is primary, that serves as organic fertilizer, improving soil
with crops planned to meet fodder needs. Livestock structure and reducing dependence on chemical
improve soil fertility through manure recycling, provide inputs. This integration not only boosts soil health
meat, milk, eggs, and offer climate resilience, biodiversity but also diversifies farm income. Practices like
enhancement, and income security. Examples: fish + rotational grazing on cover crops or fallow fields
crop, sheep/cattle + crop. help evenly distribute manure while minimizing
Tree-based IFS: Multipurpose trees are integrated soil compaction, further supporting sustainable and
with crops, livestock, or aquaculture to supply fuel, productive farming.
fodder, timber, and non-timber products. Trees support 5. Agroforestry practices: Integrating agroforestry
soil conservation, nutrient cycling, carbon sequestration, into farming systems offers multiple benefits such
biodiversity, and diversified income, while enhancing as soil improvement, biodiversity conservation,
environmental and social resilience. and additional income sources. In saline and sodic
Horticulture-based IFS: Incorporates fruits, areas, planting salt-tolerant tree species like Tamarix
vegetables, herbs, and ornamentals with livestock, and Populus helps lower water tables, reduce soil
poultry, aquaculture, or agroforestry. Offers higher salinity, and stabilize soil structure. For example,
yields, income diversification, biodiversity conservation, windbreaks or shelterbelts made of these trees can
climate resilience, and improved rural livelihoods. mitigate wind erosion, decrease soil salinity and
Indian Farming 33
November 2025
sodicity, and provide extra income through timber implementation of salt-tolerant crops such as quinoa
or fruit production. Overall, agroforestry contributes and halophytes led to a noteworthy increase in overall
to long-term soil health, enhances climate resilience, crop yield. Drip irrigation systems and rainwater
and promotes sustainable land use practices in harvesting techniques were implemented, resulting
challenging saline/sodic environments. in a 30% reduction in water usage while maintaining
or increasing crop productivity. Additionally, the
Case study: Coastal farming community, Gujarat, India integration of agroforestry and livestock helped enhance
This case study focused on a coastal farming soil fertility and biodiversity.
community in Gujarat, India, facing challenges of The implementation of integrated sustainable farming
high soil salinity due to proximity to seawater.The practices improved soil health as well as increased crop
community adopted a multi-faceted approach involving yield. Furthermore, it also increased the resilience of
crop diversification, efficient water management, and the farming community to climate change and market
soil health improvement. Over a span of three years, the fluctuations.
Table 2. Enterprise mix diversification: An option for ecologically sustainable food and nutritional security of small holders in Indo-Gangetic plains
Crop components Horticulture subsidiary components
Grain production Fodder Vegetables Fruit trees Livestocks/Poultrr Fisheries
(1.0 ha) (0.2) Sorghum (0.2) (0.2) (0.2) 3 Buffaloes (0.2) Catla
Rice (Oryza sativa) - (Sorghum Cabbage (Brassica oleracea Guava (Psidium +2 Cows 120 Rohu Mirgal
Wheat (Triticum aestivum) bicolour) - var. capitata) - Tomato guajava) + Birds Common carp
(0.2) Berseem (Solanum lycopersicum)- Papaya (Carica Grass carp
Rice-Wheat-Moong (Vigna (Trifolium Khira (Cucumis sativus) papaya) +
radiate) alexandrinu (0.2) (0.1) Banana (Musa
Maize (Zea mays)- Wheat- Bottlegourd (Lagenaria paradisiaca)
Moong (0.2) sicerarial)- Cauliflower
Soybean (Glycine max)- (Brassica oleracea var.
Winter Maize (0.2) botrytis) (0.1)
Pigeon pea (Cajanus Potato (Solanum tuberosum)-
Cajan)-Mustard (Brassica Onion (Allium cepa)-Okra
spp.)/Fodder maize (0.2) (Abelmoschus esculentus)
Source: Yadav et al. 2021
Table 3. Diversification of enterprise mix: An alternate for ecologically sustainable food and nutritional security for smallholder farmersof Indo-
Gangetic plains
Component Area (Ha) Rice equivalent Gross Income USS Expenditure Net Income B.C. Ratio
yield (t/ha) USS USS
Rice-Wheat 0.2 11.1 755 290 465 2.6
Rice-Wheat-Moong 0.2 12.2 833 302 531 2.8
Maizd-Wheat-Moong 0.2 7.0 479 180 299 2.7
Winter Maize-Soybean 0.2 3.7 250 99 151 2.5
Pigeon pea-Mustard-maize 0.2 4.3 295 134 161 2.2
Fodder 0.2 4.4 297 103 194 2.9
Vegetables 0.2 6.4 434 225 209 1.9
Fruit trees 0.2 6.6 451 108 343 4.2
Livestocks 0.2 67.7 4602 2070 2532 2.2
Fisheries 0.2 9.3 631 153 478 4.1
Enterprise mix diversification 2 13.3 9027 3664 5363 2.5
Source: Yadav et al. 2021
Table 4. Alterations in chemical and physical properties of soil underdifferent production systems after eight years of research
Cropping Systems Year pH2 EC(dS/m) OC(%) N (kg/ha) P (kg/ha) K Sat. Hydr. Cond. (cm/h)
Grain production Initial 8.3 0.28 0.14 106.0 24.8 300.0 1.5
Final 8.3 0.48 0.35 138.5 36.4 188.1 1.8
Fodder production Initial 8.2 0.35 0.14 103.5 26.8 301.5 1.7
Final 8.1 0.33 0.58 133.3 20.8 214.3 1.8
Horticulture production Initial 7.9 0.41 0.14 121.0 24.2 379.9 1.8
Final 8.1 0.30 0.98 128.1 39.8 253.1 2.0
Vegetable production Initial 7.7 0.46 0.14 123.0 28.1 409.0 1.6
Final 7.7 0.49 0.23 135.9 49.1 324.0 1.8
Pond dykes Initial 10.3 4.00 0.14 55.3 15.0 213.5 1.8
Final 9.0 0.93 0.35 120.2 18.9 294.8 2.0
Source: Yadav et al. 2021
34 Indian Farming
November 2025
Rice- W R h ic e e a - t W heat- M M a o i o ze n - g W he S at o - y M b o ea o n n - g W P i n i g te e r o m n p a e iz a e - Wi nter maize F o d der Ve geta bles Fr uit trees pri F s i e x M he i r x ie D s i versi ficati o n
nter
E
Water use efficiency (Kg/ha/cm) of various components under enterprise mix diversification
Source: Yadav et al. 2021
Table 5. Credit worthiness of different components of IFS Constraints in IFS
• Inadequate funds.
Cost of
Cropping Total Net return • Unavailability of animal supplements round the
cultivation BC Ratio
systems (Kg) income (`) (`) year
• Unavailability of labour.
Rice-wheat 5235 10103 4868 1.93 • Lack of procurement of high yielding breeds of
livestock.
Forage 1198 2228 1030 1.85
• Non-availability of fish seed and feed timely.
• Low-cost energy efficient pumping machine.
Vegetables 2989 7472 4483 2.50
• Lack of awareness to government schemes and
Fruit 3600 2100 - 1.70 credit support from financial institutions.
Fish 16254 42840 26586 2.63 SUMMARY
Diversifying existing farming systems through
Total 29276 64743 36967 2.21
changes in crops and cropping patterns, integrating and
Source: Technical bulletin, CSSRI, Lucknow improving livestock, adding horticulture, introducing
processing activities, and establishing boundary
Table 6. Yield and benefit cost ratio of different crop
plantations can significantly improve the income of
Crop Yield (Kg) Expenses Income (`) BC Ratio small and marginal farmers in India. Various IFS models
(`)
have shown 2–3 times higher productivity and 3–5
times greater net returns, along with 40–50% resource
Fish 1820 66000 163800 2.5
savings, daily household incomes of `400–500, and
Potato 1000 3000 10000 3.3 70–80% higher employment generation, while ensuring
nutritional security. IFS offers progressive economic
Onion 400 1000 6000 6
growth, employment, optimal resource use, and family
nutrition, enhancing farmers’ confidence by increasing
Garlic 100 500 2000 4
productivity, profitability, and sustainability, especially
Turmeric 100 500 2000 4 for those with small holdings. Although numerous
IFS models exist across the country, they remain
Maize 200 500 2000 4
insufficiently documented, highlighting the need for
systematic recording and wider dissemination to benefit
Pigeon pea 40 500 2000 4
more farmers.
Total 72000 187800
*Corresponding author email: nirmalsingh@hau.ac.in
Source: Singh et al. 2014
Indian Farming 35
November 2025
)mc/ah/gK(
ycneicffiE
esU
retaW
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Indian Farming 75 (03): 36-39; November 2025
Improving crop resilience to salinity
stress using growth regulators
Pooja Gupta Soni1*, Roohi1, Kannoj1, Paras kamboj1, Sarita Rani1,
Satpal1 and Krishan Kumar2
1Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar, Haryana 125 001
2Krishi Vigyan Kendra (ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi),
Shikohpur, Gurugram, Haryana 122 004
Worldwide climate change and declining availability of high-quality water lead to an increase in
the salinization of agricultural lands. One of the major abiotic factors limiting plant growth and
development is soil salinity. High salts concentrations in soil and water interfere plant physiological
and metabolic processes, ultimately resulting in reduced growth, quality, and yield. In recent years,
the application of plant growth regulators (Exogenous application or seed priming) can enhance
plant tolerance to stress by modifying ionic and redox homeostasis, enhancing antioxidant activity,
and affecting stress-responsive gene expression. Growth regulators such as abscisic acid, salicylic
acid, jasmonic acid, gibberellins, cytokinins, and ethylene play an important role in reducing the
harmful effects of salinity on plant growth and yield.
Keywords: Abscisic acid, Cytokinins, Growth regulators, Gibberellins, Salinity, Salicylic acid
SOIL salinity is a significant abiotic factor that impacts about 50% of arable land would be damaged by salt.
crop plants and restricts global production.In India, Salinization can be occurred by two ways: primary and
around 6.73 million hectares of land are impacted by secondary. Primary salinization happens spontaneously
soil salinity, constituting roughly 2.1% of the nation's as a result of wind and rain-induced sea salt deposits
entire geographical area Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh and or rock weathering. In arid regions, excessive irrigation
Maharashtra shares more than 60% salt affected area often leads to secondary salinization, wherein salts
on the country. Estimates indicate that approximately accumulate due to inadequate drainage and poor water
10% of land becomes salinized annually, and by 2050, management, compelling farmers to leave affected farms
and intensifying land degradation.
It is becoming major concern of
32.9% irrigated agriculture.
30
Effects of salinity stress on plants
25
Salt stress has detrimental
20.3%
20 effect of the plants. Salt stress
resulted in physiological effects,
15
biochemical effects, osmotic
9.0% stress and ion imbalance. Due to
6.5%
5.4% 5.5% stomatal closure, which restricts
4.1% 3.4%
2.3% 2.2% 2.2% 2.2% 2.1% CO uptake and chlorophyll
1.1% 0.3% 0.3% 2
G U uj tt a a ra r t Pra d M e a s h h aras W ht e r s a t Benga R l ajast T h a a m n il N dh a d ra u Pra desh b e a x l r t e p e a o r k s s d u o r m e w , e n ta s b a d l o u t l r ic i s n t g r p es a e s t x h t w e d n a r d a y e s s d t i c a a s n l a l l d y t An photosynthesis. In plant tissues,
States hazardous levels of sodium (Na+)
Share (%) of Salt affected soils in India and chloride (Cl−) ions build up,
36 Indian Farming
November 2025
)%(
aerA
lioS
detceffA
tlaS
fo
egatnecreP
Salt-wise Percentage of Salt Affected Soils in India
10
5
0 haryana Bihar Punj K ab arnataka M O a d d h m is y a h a n a P & r a N d ic e o s b h ar Islan J d a s m m Ke u r & al a Kash mir
And
Stunt growth and poor germination of wheat under saline condition
functions including protein synthesis and enzyme
activation are impacted by this ionic imbalance. Salt
stress modifies biochemical pathways, which results
in osmolyte buildup, reactive oxygen species (ROS)
generation, and modifications to metabolic processes.
Role of specific growth regulators in mitigating salinity stress
To reduce the detrimental effects of salt stress on
plant growth and yield, two distinct strategies can be
adopted. The first strategy involves using molecular
or traditional breeding to create cultivars that are
resistant to salt. The second strategy pertains to
agronomical methods and involves applying different
plant growth regulators (PGRs). Synthetic or naturally
occurring organic chemicals that affect higher plant
biological processes at very low concentrations are
known as plant growth regulators (PGRs). PGRs are
widely affordable and easy to apply to crops, and
they all have the same function of controlling intrinsic
hormone levels in plants by modifying signaling
Effect of salinity stress on crop plants
within different hormone transduction pathways. The
resulting in cellular toxicity and preventing enzymatic effectiveness of PGPRs depends on the interaction
activity. Ion imbalance, osmotic stress, and oxidative of host plant with soil environment. Certain PGRs
damage are the causes of salt toxicity. Increased salinity have been demonstrated to improve plants' ability
causes an accumulation of Na+ and Cl−, which upsets to withstand salt including ethylene, salicylic acid
the equilibrium of vital nutrients, especially potassium (SA), abscisic acid (ABA), jasmonic acid (JA), and
(K+), calcium (Ca2+) and magnesium (Mg2+). Important brassinosteroids (BRs).
Table 1. Roles of specific PGRs under salinity stress with examples
PGRs Structures Role Example
Abscisic Acid  Key stress hormone, regulates stomatal Improves salt tolerance in crops
(ABA) closure to reduce water loss under salinity like wheat and maize by enhancing
stress, maintaining plant water status. root growth and reducing Na+
 Enhances the expression of stress- accumulation
responsive genes and promotes the
accumulation of osmolytes to improve
osmotic adjustment.
Gibberellins  Promote cell elongation, seed Improve salt tolerance in tomato and
germination, and overall growth barley by promoting shoot and root
 Counteract growth inhibition caused by growth
high salt levels
Auxins (e.g.,  Regulate root development, critical for Mitigates salinity stress in soybean
Indole-3-Acetic water and nutrient uptake by improving root growth and
Acid) reducing oxidative damage
Indian Farming 37
November 2025
PGRs Structures Role Example
Cytokinins  Delay senescence, maintain chlorophyll Kinetin application improves salt
content, and promote cell division tolerance in wheat by enhancing
chlorophyll stability and antioxidant
activity
Salicylic Acid  Enhances plant defense against salinity- Salt tolerance in mung bean and rice
(SA) induced oxidative stress and improves by enhancing antioxidant capacity
photosynthetic efficiency and maintaining membrane stability
Jasmonic Acid  Enhances stress signaling and improves Methyl jasmonate application
(JA) plant resilience to salinity by activating alleviates salinity stress in pepper by
defense mechanisms improving photosynthetic rates and
reducing Na+ toxicity
Brassinosteroids  Improve plant growth and stress tolerance 24-epibrassinolide application
by enhancing photosynthetic efficiency enhances salt tolerance in
and membrane stability cucumber and rice by improving
photosynthesis and antioxidant
defenses
Ethylene  Modulates stress responses, effects Application of ethylene precursors
varying based on concentration and plant (e.g. ethephon) can enhance salt
species tolerance in certain crops like maize
 At low levels, it can promote stress by improving root growth and ion
tolerance balance
Thio-urea  Cope with drought, heat and heavy metal Improve grain yield by influencing
toxicity by improving antioxidant defense gas exchange, nutrient uptake and
mechanism sugar mechanism in various crops
 Potent antioxidant, scavenging harmful
ROS, Protect oxidative damage
Spray of salicylic acid under Spray of thio-urea under
saline water irrigation saline water irrigation
Effect of foliar spray of thio-urea and salicylic acid on the mustard crop under saline water irrigation
Mechanisms: One of the key mechanisms through key enzymic antioxidants like superoxide dismutase
which PGRs induce salt tolerance is the regulation of ion (SOD), catalase (CAT), peroxidase (POD) and ascorbate
homeostasis and compartmentalization. ABA promotes peroxidase (APX), thus scavenging reactive oxygen
selective accumulation and intracellular sequestration of species (ROS) and safeguarding cellular structures from
Na+ ions in vacuoles, lessening cytoplasmic toxicity and oxidative damage.
enzyme activity. At the same time, PGRs like SA and JA Furthermore, PGRs are also crucial for maintaining
enhance the accumulation of osmolytes proline, glycine photosynthesis under salinity stress. Brassinosteroids
betaine and soluble sugars, which account for osmotic and cytokinins have been found to preserve chloroplast
adjustment and cell turgor maintenance. Oxidative ultrastructure, maintain chlorophyll content and keep
stress, a significant salinity impact, is tempered by PGR- photochemical activity intact, leading to enhanced
augmented activity of the antioxidant defense system. carbon assimilation. The regulators also affect root
Exogenously applied PGRs augment the activity of some architecture, with auxins and cytokinins promoting
38 Indian Farming
November 2025
soil or fertigation-based delivery of
PGRs particularly ABA analogs and
polyamines enables direct targeting of
the root zone, enhancing ion regulation
and root metabolic activity. The efficacy
of PGRs is further amplified when
combined with salt-tolerant genotypes
and soil amendments. For instance,
integrated use of SA and halophilic
plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
(PGPR) has demonstrated synergistic
effects on nutrient uptake, antioxidative
capacity and biomass accumulation in
salt-stressed wheat.
Given the projected expansion of
salt-affected arable land, especially in
arid and semi-arid agro-ecosystems,
the use of PGRs represents a
promising strategy for enhancing
crop performance under salinity
stress. However, successful field-level
implementation necessitates crop-
Effect of salinity on the plant and recovery through different mechanisms specific standardization of dosages,
delivery methods and timing schedules.
lateral root growth and augmenting the surface area of
Advances in nano-formulation technologies offer new
roots for water and nutrient uptake. Furthermore, ABA-
avenues for improving the stability, bioavailability and
mediated regulation of stomata reduces transpirational
targeted delivery of PGRs. Future research should focus
water loss, thus enhancing water-use efficiency under
on elucidating the molecular networks underpinning
salt stress. Importantly, functional coordination
PGR-mediated salinity tolerance and on integrating
between various PGRs enables plants to coordinate
these compounds with genomics-assisted breeding,
a highly integrated response to salinity. ABA, SA, JA
microbial bio stimulants and precision agriculture tools
and ethylene crosstalk regulates stress-responsive
to develop resilient and sustainable crop production
gene expression, ion transport and hormonal signaling
systems for salt-affected regions.
pathways, leading to enhanced and integrated defense.
SUMMARY
Practical approaches and application techniques
High salts concentrations in soil and water interfere
The practical application of PGRs in saline agriculture
plant physiological and metabolic processes, ultimately
requires strategic timing, appropriate formulation and
resulting in reduced growth, quality, and yield. The
integration with complementary agronomic practices.
application of plant growth regulators is a key strategy
Seed priming with low concentrations of SA, GA, or
3 for enhancing crop tolerance to salinity stress. These
BRs has been shown to enhance germination, seedling
regulators help plant survival and productivity under
vigour and stress preparedness by inducing a primed
salt-affected conditions by regulating hormonal signaling,
physiological state. Foliar application is a widely
increasing antioxidant activity, and maintaining ionic and
adopted approach, offering rapid uptake and systemic osmotic balance.
effects; multiple sprays at critical phenological stages
such as tillering and flowering can effectively alleviate *Corresponding author email: poojagupta.agri@gmail.com
salt-induced damage. In salt-affected irrigated systems,
Plant trees, Conserve water,
Protect environment.
Indian Farming 39
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 40-43; November 2025
Combined effects of heavy metal toxicity
and salinity on wheat: Challenges and mitigation strategies
Deodate Jose George1, Vanita Pandey1, Rinki1*, Mamrutha H M1, Mahendra
Firoda1, Preety Rani1, Zeenat Wadhwa1, Yogesh Kumar1, Mukesh Kumar Singh2,
Gopalareddy K3 and Vanishree Girimalla3
1ICAR-Indian Institute of Wheat and Barley Research, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
2ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, Research Station, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
3ICAR-Indian Institute of Seed Science, Research Station, Gandhi Krishi Vigyana Kendra Campus,
Bengaluru, Karnataka 560 065
Wheat (Triticum aestivum), a staple crop nourish nearly 40% of the global population, is
increasingly threatened by soil salinity and heavy metal contamination. These stresses, often
occurring together, impair photosynthesis, disrupt nutrient uptake, and enhance oxidative damage,
leading to reduced yield and grain quality. Heavy metals such as lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), arsenic
(As), and chromium (Cr) accumulate in plant tissues and pose serious food safety concerns.
Salinity further aggravates the problem by inducing osmotic stress. This article summarizes the
combined effects of salinity and heavy metal toxicity on wheat growth and phenology, and outlines
detoxification mechanisms including sequestration, chelation, and antioxidant defense. Sustainable
mitigation strategies, such as plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR), phytoremediation,
bioremediation, organic amendments, and salt/metal-tolerant varieties offer effective solutions.
Integrating agronomic, biological, and molecular approaches is essential to sustain wheat
productivity and ensure food security under these dual stresses.
Keywords: Bioremediation, Detoxification, Heavy metal, Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria, Salinity stress, Wheat
WHEAT (Triticum spp.), a staple cereal crop from in plant tissues, disrupt plant growth and metabolic
the Poaceae family, provides food and nutrition functions, and pose significant risks to human and
to nearly 40% of the global population and contributes animal health via the food chain. Soil salinity, often
approximately 20% of the world's daily calorie and co-occurring with HM contamination, is another major
protein intake. It is vital to global food security, especially constraint to crop productivity, particularly in arid and
in developing nations, and supports the livelihoods of semi-arid regions. According to FAO (2022), salinity
over 80 million smallholder farmers. India ranks second affects up to 50% of irrigated lands in some regions and
globally in wheat production, contributing about 11.9% is expected to worsen due to climate change. Salt stress
of global output and cultivating approximately 12% of impairs plant functions by causing ionic and osmotic
the total wheat-growing area. stress, oxidative damage, membrane disruption, and
Among the growing challenges in wheat cultivation, metabolic imbalances—ultimately reducing growth and
heavy metal (HM) contamination and soil salinity yield. Combined exposure to heavy metals and salinity
pose serious threats to sustainable crop production. exacerbates the generation of reactive oxygen species
Heavy metals such as lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), arsenic (ROS), leading to oxidative stress, DNA damage, protein
(As), copper (Cu), and nickel (Ni) are introduced into denaturation, and lipid peroxidation. The elevated
agricultural soils through anthropogenic sources uptake of toxic metals by plants not only reduces
including industrial discharge, mining activities, the agricultural output but also compromises food safety.
use of fertilizers, sewage sludge, and contaminated Essential trace metals like zinc (Zn) and copper (Cu),
irrigation water. These toxic elements can accumulate though vital for physiological functions, can become
40 Indian Farming
November 2025
toxic when their concentrations exceed optimal levels. synergistically, enabling plants to adapt and thrive in
Plants act as conduits for the transfer of heavy metals heavy metal-contaminated environments. The specific
from soil to higher trophic levels, emphasizing the need response varies depending on the cereal species and
for accurate monitoring of metal concentrations in soils environmental conditions.
and crops. Such assessments are critical for evaluating
potential health risks and guiding mitigation strategies. Bioremediation of heavy metal toxicity: A general perspective
Recent studies have investigated concentrations of Several physical and chemical techniques such as
metals like Cu, Zn, Ni, and Cr in both soils and wheat coagulation, chemical precipitation, ion exchange,
grains, underlining the urgent need for integrated nanofiltration, reverse osmosis, soil washing, and
approaches to manage these dual stresses. excavation have been employed to remediate heavy
metal-contaminated soils. However, these methods
Defence strategies against heavy metal toxicity: Detoxification are often costly, labour-intensive, disruptive to the soil
mechanisms and adaptation strategies ecosystem, and impractical for large-scale application.
Heavy metal toxicity poses significant environmental In contrast, bioremediation has emerged as a sustainable
and health challenges, affecting ecosystems, wildlife, and eco-friendly alternative. It involves modifying
and human populations. Metals such as lead (Pb), environmental conditions to enhance the activity
mercury (Hg), arsenic (As), and cadmium (Cd) can of microorganisms that can degrade or immobilize
cause severe health problems, including organ damage, pollutants, thereby restoring soil health. Bioremediation
neurological disorders, and cancer. To mitigate is broadly classified into: In situ bioremediation
these harmful effects, both natural detoxification (treatment of contaminants directly at the polluted
processes and adaptive strategies have evolved in site; it is cost-effective and less invasive) and Ex situ
humans and animals, including chelation, enzymatic bioremediation (removal of contaminated soil for
detoxification, bioaccumulation, and environmental treatment elsewhere; generally more expensive and
adaptations. Ongoing research in chelation therapy and environmentally taxing).
bioremediation remains essential for managing heavy Due to lower cost and minimal environmental
metal contamination. disruption, in situ bioremediation is the preferred
Cereal crops, which are highly vulnerable to approach for managing heavy metal-contaminated
heavy metal toxicity, have developed various defense soils. Common microbiological strategies for metal
mechanisms to mitigate the harmful effects of toxic remediation include bioaccumulation (uptake of metals
metals like Cd, Pb, and Hg, safeguarding agricultural by microbial cells), biosorption (passive binding of
productivity and food safety. These mechanisms metals to microbial cell surfaces), biotransformation
include chelation, vacuolar sequestration, and the (conversion of toxic metals into less harmful forms),
binding of metals with organic compounds, limiting bioleaching (microbial mobilization of metals from solids
metal absorption and preventing their accumulation in into solution) and biovolatilization (transformation of
vital plant tissues. Additionally, root exudates play a metals into volatile forms). These biological processes
crucial role in modifying metal availability in the soil, offer promising potential for restoring soil productivity
reducing uptake, and mitigating toxicity. Cereal crops and ensuring environmental safety in contaminated
also demonstrate adaptive responses through genetic agricultural lands.
selection and breeding for enhanced metal tolerance.
Key detoxification and adaptation strategies include Major heavy metals, source, symptoms and mitigation strategy
metal transporters, metallothioneins, cell wall binding, Heavy metal contamination in soil is a growing
rhizosphere interactions, and vacuolar sequestration. concern for wheat production, as it affects plant
These mechanisms can function independently or physiology, reduces yield, and leads to bioaccumulation
in grains, posing health risks. Below is an in-
depth look at major toxic heavy metals and
their effects on wheat.
PGPR associated growth improvement in wheat under
metal stress
The effectiveness of plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria (PGPR) in mitigating heavy
metal stress in wheat depends on their metal
tolerance, colonization ability, and functional
traits. Beyond their typical plant growth-
promoting functions, PGPR play a crucial role
in alleviating metal-induced toxicity, thereby
enhancing wheat growth and productivity in
contaminated soils. In various studies, PGPR
inoculation has led to notable improvements
in wheat grown under heavy metal stress:
Indian Farming 41
November 2025
Table 1. Brief outline of heavy metals, their source, effect and mitigation strategies in wheat
Heavy Metal Source Effect on Wheat Mitigation Strategies
Lead (Pb) -Industrial emissions, mining, -Inhibits root elongation and damages cell -Phytoremediation using Pb-accumulating
vehicle exhaust structure plants (e.g., sunflower, mustard)
- Lead-containing pesticides - Reduces chlorophyll content, causing - Organic amendments (e.g., manure,
and contaminated fertilizers chlorosis biochar) to immobilize Pb
- Sewage sludge and - Disrupts water balance, affecting - Calcium and phosphorus fertilizers to
wastewater irrigation metabolism reduce Pb bioavailability
- Decreases grain quality and accumulates in
kernels
Cadmium -Industrial waste, phosphate -Interferes with water and nutrient uptake -Soil amendments (biochar, organic matter,
(Cd) fertilizers, metal mining - Reduces chlorophyll synthesis, affecting lime) to reduce Cd mobility
- Contaminated irrigation photosynthesis - Growing Cd-tolerant wheat varieties
water, sewage sludge - Stunts root and shoot growth - Crop rotation with Cd hyperaccumulators
- Accumulates in grains, posing health risks (e.g., Brassica species)
Arsenic (As) -Industrial effluents, mining, -Alters metabolic pathways and enzyme -Silicon and iron-based fertilizers to reduce
contaminated groundwater activities uptake
- Pesticides and herbicides - Causes root browning and stunted growth - Growing wheat varieties with low arsenic
containing arsenic - Reduces seed germination and chlorophyll accumulation
content - Avoiding arsenic-contaminated irrigation
- Increases grain arsenic concentration, water
making wheat unsafe
Mercury (Hg) -Industrial pollution, coal -Disrupts cellular functions by binding to -Bioaugmentation using mercury-resistant
combustion, mercury- proteins and enzymes bacteria
containing pesticides - Causes oxidative stress, leading to DNA - Organic amendments to immobilize Hg in
- Wastewater from chemical damage soil
industries - Reduces seed germination and plant growth - Avoiding mercury-containing fertilizers and
- Accumulates in plant tissues, entering the pesticides
food chain
Chromium -Tannery waste, textile dyes, -Inhibits root development and disrupts -Organic matter and biochar to reduce Cr
(Cr) industrial emissions metabolism bioavailability
- Electroplating industry - Reduces photosynthesis by affecting - Cr-resistant microbes to promote plant
waste, polluted irrigation chlorophyll biosynthesis growth
water - Causes oxidative stress, leading to early - Avoiding wastewater irrigation from
senescence tanneries
- Affects protein and enzyme function,
reducing yield
Nickel (Ni) -Industrial activities, -Toxic at high concentrations, causing leaf -Organic amendments (compost, farmyard
electroplating, mining chlorosis and necrosis manure) to reduce Ni toxicity
- Sewage sludge, fertilizers, - Interferes with iron uptake, leading to - Soil pH adjustment using lime to reduce Ni
contaminated water nutrient deficiencies solubility
- Inhibits seed germination and weakens - Crop rotation with Ni-accumulating plants
plant defenses (e.g. Alyssum species)
- Reduces protein synthesis and grain quality
• Cadmium (Cd) stress: Inoculation with Pseudomonas • Copper (Cu) stress: Bacillus sp. USTB-O, an IAA-
strains SNA5 and PBB1 improved germination, root producing strain, improved growth, reduced
and shoot length, and overall growth. proline accumulation, and strengthened antioxidant
• Chromium (Cr) stress: Pseudomonas fluorescens defenses.
Q14 and Bacillus thuringiensis KAP5, possessing • General metal stress: Inoculation with Azotobacter
ACC deaminase and phosphate-solubilizing traits, chroococcum and other PGPR strains consistently
enhance root (208%) and shoot (67%) growth, as well reduced oxidative stress markers. Bacillus subtilis
as dry biomass of roots (140%) and shoots (71%). SU47 and Arthrobacter sp. SU18 were also effective
• Zinc (Zn) stress: Pseudomonas aeruginosa increased in lowering antioxidant enzyme activity, indicating
photosynthetic pigment content, improved growth stress alleviation.
parameters, and reduced oxidative stress indicators • Arsenic (As) stress: Pseudomonas gessardii and
such as malondialdehyde (MDA) and antioxidant Brevundimonas intermedia increased dry biomass and
enzyme activity. reduced oxidative stress. Similarly, Planomicrobium
chinense and Bacillus cereus lowered antioxidant
• Lead (Pb) stress: Azotobacter and Azospirillum strains
enzyme activity under metal stress.
enhanced membrane stability and grain yield while
These findings demonstrate the potential of PGPR
reducing MDA, proline, and hydrogen peroxide
as a sustainable and eco-friendly strategy to enhance
(H₂O₂) levels.
wheat growth and yield under heavy metal stress while
42 Indian Farming
November 2025
simultaneously mitigating toxicity through improved Innovative tools such as nanotechnology, biochar,
physiological and biochemical responses. and organic soil amendments are proving effective in
immobilizing metals and restoring soil health. Precision
Mitigation strategies for salinity in wheat agriculture through targeted nutrient management
Salinity stress poses a major challenge to wheat and real-time soil monitoring further supports resilient
cultivation, affecting plant growth, water uptake, wheat cultivation in contaminated areas. Combined
and yield. Effective mitigation strategies include the with strong environmental regulations and ongoing
development and use of salt-tolerant wheat varieties research, these integrated approaches offer a path
through traditional breeding and genetic engineering. toward safe, productive, and sustainable wheat farming
Agronomic practices such as proper irrigation in heavy metal-affected regions.
management, use of gypsum or organic amendments,
and crop rotation help reduce salt accumulation in the SUMMARY
root zone. The application of plant growth-promoting Heavy metal toxicity and salinity severely impacts
rhizobacteria (PGPR) and mycorrhizal fungi can enhance wheat growth, physiology, and yield by inducing
stress tolerance by improving nutrient uptake and oxidative stress, impairing photosynthesis, and
reducing oxidative damage. Additionally, seed priming
disrupting nutrient uptake. Toxic metals like cadmium
with osmoprotectants and foliar sprays of antioxidants
(Cd), lead (Pb), mercury (Hg), nickel (Ni), chromium
or micronutrients can strengthen the plant’s defense
(Cr), and arsenic (As) accumulate in plant tissues,
mechanisms, promoting better growth and yield under
posing significant risks to human and animal health
saline conditions.
through the food chain. Mitigation strategies such as the
application of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
Future prospects
(PGPR), microbial bioremediation, phytoremediation,
Emerging strategies for combating heavy metal stress
and the use of melanin-producing organisms offer
in wheat include advances in bioremediation, genetic
effective and sustainable solutions. Additionally, the
engineering, and sustainable agronomic practices.
interaction between cadmium and zinc plays a critical
Research is focusing on plant-microbe partnerships,
role in determining the nutritional quality of wheat and
including metal-tolerant rhizobacteria and mycorrhizal
warrants further study.
fungi, to enhance metal detoxification. Breeding and
genetic modification aim to develop wheat varieties
*Corresponding author email: rinkikhobra@gmail.com
with enhanced tolerance and reduced metal uptake.
Basic Statistical Techniques in
Animal Breeding
This publication has been designed to cover most of important topics of Animal Breeding which
includes some of the basic statistical techniques applied in animal breeding, population genetics
and principles of animal breeding. The content of this book is in accordance with syllabus of most of the undergraduate and post graduate coursed of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, DR T.V. RAJA DR R.S. GANDHI DR UMESH SINGH Animal Science, Dairy Science and Biological Sciences. This book will be useful for Undergraduate and Post-graduate students, teachers of Animal Breeding and Genetics in State Agricultural
Veterinary Universities and other educations institutions and also scientists who are associated
with animal sciences research.
ISBN:978-81-7164-291-5
Indian Council Noef wA gDreicluhiltural Research
www.icar.org.in
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
Pages: v + 220; Price: ` 700.00, US$ 90.00; Postage: `100
ISBN No.: 978-81-7164-291-5
For obtaining copies, please contact:
SCAN QR Code to
Business Unit Purchase Online
ICAR-Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan – I, Pusa, New Delhi 110012
Tel: 011-25843657; email: businessuniticar@gmail.com
website: www.icar.org.in
Indian Farming 43
November 2025
Basic Statistical Techniques
in
Animal
Breeding
B T a e si c c h n St iq a u ti e s s t i i c n a l Basic Statistical
Animal Breeding Techniques in
o tT cpb Dtg V a Go o h o s h ao r t fe e a p h aa n s sp i t n i s t rt i d e eo i tu c e c y h e r r ut c bs l t i e h an ie n a S i o s a c t i t o d t a t c o s t s i u a e oo f e i u r k eb ny t i fn dc n A n i o h s dt s a S w g c h n ot a t S e t c e e u i i i i k s i ir t c s o m t n e da g a h a w n b b n e et r al n a e a e ot ca in l ld it l e n e od l c t e A i B n i b s n s k au B m c g r , e s n a a h i d i e r s o ta d n t i n t e u e ic l l ei e t di s n o s A d u su q a i eg i c l p n g a t u a n tcf i i i r i n u c e e c n o h g u m ic a n r e n s n d le o a la d c w c f s r l r o ai l e S s , p pd ht V H p r as c o o la i e ep o i n U u c r e ns t c s e hl f d s n i n t e c o e s b o e d r c a A v e id ga f i n e e ln e w a n s nr a c sr a r i r a o ig d nnl i . m c t r u m d r r i s T h y hm d a yu a a c h . o s , e d U n i l a a eA e s y s u n t il B t n m l n e aa lb i s a tv o i r tu r m a i o e b e e s f e c t l e m r u t o h e a i a ss m d b s l d u on e i S r itw io r r p nd e i n scs e f oo h g eg i P e s e m f h r o d. s o t n a T a o ita o a n s c nn h h p n o r s t g e dd e e e e - t t f , , Animal Breeding
44 Indian Farming
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 45-47; November 2025
An overview of emerging trends in sodicity
reclamation and enhanced food production
Parul Sundha*, Nirmalendu Basak, Arvind Kumar Rai, Priyanka Chandra,
Amresh Chaudhary and Rajender Kumar Yadav
ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
Soil salinity and sodicity have emerged as serious environmental concerns worldwide. The poor soil
structure, variability in soil chemical properties and low nutritional status restrict the crop growth
with lower productivity in these soils. Around 50 % of the world's arable lands are moderately
or highly affected by different levels of degradation. Sodic soils are characterized by high pH and
exchangeable sodium percentage, poor hydraulic conductivity with large clay dispersion and
significantly low nutrient availability. Gypsum application is the most widely adopted technology
for sodic soil reclamation. However, considering the issues related to the availability and purity
of mined gypsum, other alternatives are also explored. Some potential industrial by-products,
organic sources, and conjunctive synthetic and organic formulations for rapid and cost-effective
alternatives to degraded land reclamation are discussed in the article.
Keywords: Crop productivity, Degradation, Nutrients, Reclamation, Soil sodicity
I NDIA accounts for 6.73 million hectares of land
affected by salinity and sodicity, which impacts the
livelihood security in arid and semi-arid regions. Out
of this total salt-affected area, sodic soils account for
more than 50% (3.77 m ha). The areas are expected to
increase under extensive irrigation with RSC and high
SAR water. Sodic soils, or alkali soils, contain higher
levels of sodium (Na+) relative to the calcium (Ca2+) and
magnesium (Mg2+) in the soil exchange sites and the
soil solution. The exchangeable sodium percentage is
more than 15, pH > 8.2 and variable ECe. The soils are
s
characterized by poor physical structure with larger Sodic soil in Etah district of Uttar Pradesh
clay dispersion, less pore space and poor hydraulic
Sodic soil reclamation
conductivity. These soils are often low in organic
Gypsum, chemically CaSO.2HO is the most
matter and other nutrients. High alkaline hydrolysis, 4 2
effective amendment source in sodic soils. The gypsum
and toxic appearance of Na+ and the precipitation
requirement (GR) is calculated based on the amount of
of Ca2+ as CaCO further exacerbate the Na-induced
3 salts present in the soil and other parameters like soil
toxicity and nutritional deficiency. The widely used
structure, water quality available for irrigation and
chemical ameliorants in saline – sodic soils are gypsum,
crop variety opted. The reaction activity of the gypsum
elemental sulphur, phosphogypsum, FGD gypsum, involves the replacement of Na+ from the exchange
silicious chalk, etc. Besides, organic sources such as complex by Ca2+ ions through leaching to the lower
farmyard manure (FYM), press mud, corn stalks, city depths. Gypsum is made available to farmers through
waste compost, biogas slurry and crop residue are also different agencies across the country, like the World
used with reduced doses of gypsum to amend the salt- Bank, European Union, and State Soil Reclamation
affected soils. and Development Corporations, other developmental
Indian Farming 45
November 2025
agencies etc. It is reported that 2.10 M ha of alkali lands physico-chemical properties, reduce the nutritional
have been reclaimed by different technologies, with the losses and enhance the crop yield; thereby, increasing
largest area reclaimed in Punjab (0.79 M ha), then Uttar crop productivity. Co-utilization of FGDs with organic
Pradesh (0.73 M ha), followed by Haryana (0.35 M ha) materials (manures, composts, bio-solids) is more
and a total of 0.70 M ha in other states. beneficial in terms of improving soil physical and
Industrial waste by-products are other ameliorants chemical properties and supply of essential nutrients. The
having potential for reclamation of the degraded soils. FGD gypsum having a high purity percentage (>90%),
Fly–ash contains nutrients like silicon (Si), aluminium could be a potential source of sodic soil reclamation.
(Al), iron (Fe), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), sodium Sulphuric acid (HSO) application in the calcareous
2 4
(Na), potassium (K), phosphorus (P), and sulfur (S) sodic soils reacts with the soil calcium carbonate (CaCO)
3
essential for plant growth. It also contains micro- and releases calcium sulphate, neutralizing the free
nutrients such as boron (B), copper (Cu), and zinc sodium carbonate in soils. Sulphuric acid also decreases
(Zn). Biomethanated spentwash (PBSW) is produced the alkalinity of irrigation water, but the handling and
during the process methane gas generation from raw transportation is an issue.
spent wash. It contains high organic carbon, calcium Elemental S is used to reclaim the calcareous–sodic
and potassium as nutrients for improved plant growth. soil. It is oxidized to HSO by the microbial activities
2 4
Sugarcane processing industries produce pressmud (Thiobacillus thiooxidans) under moist conditions and
with an estimated production of 3 tonnes of pressmud converts sodium carbonate and bicarbonate to sodium
cake from 100 tonnes of crushed sugarcane. Utilization sulphate. Elemental sulphur-based formulation
of pressmud in sodic soil amelioration is well reported. (Reliance formulated S) application increased 8–225%
Manures like farm yard manure (FYM) are low-cost, crop yield in low to highly sodic soils compared to
locally available source for application to degraded unreclaimed sodic soils. The soil pH was reduced by
agricultural lands. It helps increase the amount of water- 0.6–1.5 units with the application of sulphur after the
soluble salts, improves soil nutrients, and increases crop harvesting in the first season with the benefit-cost
crop production. It also increases the cation exchange ratio from 1.22 to 1.70 in different agro-ecologies.
capacity and soluble and exchangeable K, restricting the Marine gypsum is another by-product produced in
Na+ entry into the exchange complex and improving the the coastal areas of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu during
soil structure, thereby supporting crop growth in sodic the production of common salt by solar evaporation.
environment. Approximately one tonne of salt production produces
around 30–50 kg of marine gypsum and is expected
Innovative reclamation sources to combat soil sodicity to proportionally increase with the increased solar salt
Sodic soil requires high Ca++ sources for replacing production in the nation.
the Na+ in the soil exchange sites and the soil solution. Silicious chalk is the amorphous material recovered
The mined gypsum with high purity and availability from the gypsum mines. It contains silica, calcium
to the farmers is an issue nationwide. ICAR-CSSRI has and other soil nutrients for sodic soil reclamation. The
explored some potential industrial by-products, organic experiments conducted at farmers' fields have shown
sources, and conjoint synthetic and organic formulations an increase in the yield of rice and wheat crops of sodic
for rapid and cost-effective alternatives to degraded soils in Haryana and Punjab, and rice crop yield in acidic
land reclamation. soils of West Bengal. Further, biological interventions
Flue gas desulfurization gypsum (FGDG), is the for better nutrient use efficiency of silicious plants are
by-product of the coal-fired power generation plants being assessed.
produced during scrubbing of sulfur from combustion The application of city waste compost (CWC) in
gases. Applications of FGDG in sodic soils supply Ca2+ the amelioration of high pH sodic soils improves
ions to replace the Na+ in the soil matrix and improve the soil structure and aggregation, increases the
Improved crop growth in sodic soil at farmer's field in
Nagawan village, Patiala, Punjab
46 Indian Farming
November 2025
hydraulic conductivity and cation exchange capacity. limited, AMF maintain ionic balance by reducing sodium
The conjunctive use of the gypsum (25 GR) and CWC accumulation and promoting potassium uptake in crops,
decreases the soil pH, accelerates the NaCl leaching, thereby protecting cellular functions. Additionally,
decreases the exchangeable sodium percentage, they boost the plant’s antioxidant defense system and
and increases water infiltration. The increase in the modulate stress-related hormones, which collectively
soil beneficial organisms tends to reduce the plant enhance tolerance to salinity. AMF produces organic
pathogens. It is reported that the sole application of acids and glomalin, which play a crucial role in chelating
gypsum in the sodic soils reduces the nitrogen and heavy metals, boosting carbon sequestration, preventing
phosphorus availability; this can be improved with the soil erosion, and stabilizing soil macro-aggregates
CWC application in conjunction with gypsum. The rapid ultimately contributing to improved soil health. Their
acidulation of the compost and manure with elemental mycelial hyphae aid in the formation of soil aggregates,
S (S◦) and S◦ oxidisers alleviates the sodicity stress by thereby enhancing soil structure. Additionally, AMF
declining the soil pH within 28 days of soil incubation is also increases phosphorus availability in the soil through
an improved alternative to sodic soil reclamation. the synthesis of phosphatase enzymes. Phosphate-
The biogas slurry (BGS) is the by-product produced solubilizing bacteria (PSB) complement this process by
from the biogas plants as an emerging organic source releasing organic acids, siderophores, gluconic acid,
for the nutrient-deficient, degraded sodic soils. BGS is and ketogluconic acid, which facilitate mineralization
of organic phosphorus in the soil. Native AMF strains,
a rich source of organic carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus,
being well-adapted to local soil and climatic conditions,
potassium and as well as micro elements like Ca, Zn,
offer a cost-effective and sustainable strategy for
Mg, S, Fe, Cu, and Mn based on the type of feedstock
mitigating salt stress, reducing dependency on chemical
used during the fermentation. The application of biogas
inputs, and improving overall soil health through better
slurry improves the organic content in soil, macro- and
structure and water retention.
micro-nutrients in soil and reduces the NO emissions.
2
The conjoint application of slurry (25% N requirement)
SUMMARY
and sub-optimal doses (75%) of NPK fertilizers has
Soil sodicity deleteriously affects the soil health and
shown higher crop productivity and long-term nutrient
crop productivity in many of the arid and semi–arid
sustainability. This fermented organic manure is
regions of the country and is aggravated with emerging
reported to reduce the load of synthethic fertilizer
secondary salinization. Gypsum application is one of
requirement by 20%. The holistic approach works under
the methods adopted for sodicity reclamation, but the
the umbrella of government scheme ‘GOBARdhan’
issues of availability and purity of agricultural-grade
towards integrated agri–waste management and organic
gypsum have diverted attention towards the alternative
feedstock digestate utilization for environmental
sources. Presently, CSSRI is working on the utilization
stabilization and bio-circular economy, ensuring food
of elemental sulphur, flue gas desulfurization gypsum
safety and sustainable development.
(FGDG), marine gypsum, silicious chalk, pressmud
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi (AMF) enhance the
CWC, biogas slurry, AMF, etc. for the reclamation of
crop resilience under stress conditions, particularly
sodic soils with larger stock availability. The farmers'
in salt-affected soils (SAS). These fungi establish
field experiments are being conducted to assess the
mutualistic associations with plant roots, forming
potential of emerging sources in refurbishing the sodic
extensive hyphal networks that significantly improve the
soils and boosting crop yield.
uptake of growth-limiting nutrients such as phosphorus
and micronutrients. Under salt-stressed environments,
*Corresponding author email: parul34046@gmail.com
where nutrient availability and water absorption are
Processable Varieties/Hybrids of Horticultural Crops
This book will be useful for the processing industry as it provides information on the
recent varieties /hybrids of horticultural crops and their availability. The information provided
in this document will help the Indian farmers and Food Processing Industry in identifying
suitable crops and varieties/hybrids based on their processing qualities for strengthening
entrepreneurship.
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
Pages: v + 168; Price: ` 100.00, US$ 15.00; Postage: `50
ISBN No.: 987-81-7164-298-9
For obtaining copies, please contact: SCAN QR Code to
Purchase Online
Business Unit
ICAR-Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan – I, Pusa, New Delhi 110012
Tel: 011-25843657; email: businessuniticar@gmail.com
website: www.icar.gov.in
Indian Farming 47
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 48-51; Novermber 2025
Subsurface drainage technology for
restoring crop productivity in waterlogged saline soils
Sagar D. Vibhute*, Satyendra Kumar, D. S. Bundela, Suresh Kumar,
Anil R. Chinchmalatpure, Jitendra Kumar, Bhaskar Narjary,
Raj Mukhopadhyay and Aslam L. Pathan
ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
Waterlogged saline soils are severely affecting crop production in irrigated areas of the country
and appropriate technologies need to be adopted for their reclamation. Subsurface drainage (SSD)
is proven technology for reclamation of such soils and about 1,10,000 ha area has been reclaimed
in India using this technology. However, very high installation cost, non-availability of adequate
trencher machines and need of region/soil specific design requirements has resulted in its adoption
at very slow pace. The brief information of SSD technology covering its benefits, components,
installation, and a few case studies of its performance in different parts of the country is presented
in this article.
Keywords: Crop productivity, Food security, Sub-surface drainage technology, Waterlogged saline soils
LAND degradation poses significant threat for the waterlogging and soil salinity problems. Waterlogged
sustaining agricultural production in the country saline soils occur on about 2 million hectares area in arid
and climate change is further aggravating its impact and semi-arid alluvial north western states of India and
on crop production. In the past, irrigation has played more than 1 million hectares each in coastal and black
an important in Indian agriculture for safeguarding cotton soil (Vertisol) regions of the country. However, in
the nation’s food security by ensuring availability of India, area covered under subsurface drainage system
adequate irrigation water to high yielding varieties is only about 80,000 ha; and the faster pace of adoption
through extensive canal network. But at the same time, is required to achieve the land degradation neutrality
land drainage, an equally important aspect of integrated goal by 2030. Subsurface drainage (SSD) is a successful
water resource management was simply ignored. technology for reclamation of waterlogged-saline soils
This has resulted in severe problem of secondary soil and has given promising results across the soil types
salinization in canal command areas, mainly due to of the country. Apart from lowering water table to the
seepage from canals and over irrigation. The adoption desired level, it also removes excess soluble salts and
of inefficient water management practices has also led to thereby creates favourable condition for the crop growth.
Problem Benefits
Intervention
Subsurface drainage
Waterlogged saline soil Excellent crop growth
Components of subsurface drainage system
48 Indian Farming
November 2025
However, proper design, installation and operation of
drainage system is necessary to get desirable results.
Further, sub surface drainage is science as well as art of
removal of excess water, and thus, site-specific changes
in lateral spacing should be adopted to improve the
efficiency of the system and minimize cost of installation.
Considering these factors, the wider adoption of this
technology needs to be undertaken through advance
design and installation methods, appropriate policy
decisions, and financial support to the farmers.
Subsurface drainage consists of network of
underground pipelines to remove excess water from
agricultural fields. Depending upon the function, the
Semi-mechanized installation
pipes are classified as lateral, collector and main drains
and different structures like manholes, sump and outlets
are other parts of the system.
Table 1. Different components of modern-day SSD system
Component Function Specification
Lateral Primarily control Perforated single wall corrugated
pipes the ground UPVC as per BIS 9271
water table by 80 mm most commonly used size
intercepting 65 and 100 mm pipe sizes are
water coming in also available
root zone Fully-mechanized installation
Installation of sub surface drainage network
Collector Collects the Double wall corrugated (DWC)
The installation of SSD system network consists
pipes water from HDPE pipes as per BIS 16098
individual lateral Part 2: 2013 are generally of laying of perforated lateral and collector pipes,
drains and preferred, size varies from 100 to manhole and sump as per design. The installation work
convey it to the 400 mm
consists of excavation of trench, providing proper grade
main drain/outlet In severely waterlogged soils
to the trench bottom, placement of drain pipes and
to avoid floating of the pipes,
perforated UPVC pipes should backfilling of the trench. Depending upon the degree
be used, size varies from 100 to of involvement of machinery in these operations,
355 mm
installation procedure is classified as semi-mechanized
and fully mechanized. In semi mechanized installation,
Pipe Main Used in large DWC HDPE as per IS 16098 Part
Drain drainage projects 2: 2013 trench of required dimensions is excavated using
where natural Size can be up to 550 mm hydraulic excavator and subsequently desired grade
stream is far from depending discharge and
is given manually. Backfilling is also done manually
outlet different dia. pipes may be used
in project immediately after lowering the pipes. While in fully
mechanized installation, grade control and pipe laying
Sump/ Manholes help in Pre-fabricated RCC pipes are is carried out simultaneously by the drainage trencher
manholes inspection and used
machine which uses inbuilt laser guided grade control
Sump collects Diameter of pipes are 0.9 and
water at outlet 1. 2 m system. Subsequently trench is backfilled by bulldozer.
Pipe lengths used are of 2.5, 3.75 Design parameters of SSD for different regions: The
and 5 m drainage coefficient and drain spacing are the main
design parameters of SSD system.
Envelope To trap entry Non-woven poly propylene
of soil/foreign synthetic geotextiles (Thickness Table 2. Design parameters of SSD system
material in > 2.5 mm and O > 300 micron)
pipe to avoid for light and med 90 ium textured Drainage Coefficient (mm/d) Drain Spacing (m)
its chocking soils
and to improve Non-woven poly propylene/ Climate Range Optimal Soil Texture Spacing
hydraulic polyester fabric with needle
Arid 1–2 1 Light 100–150
performance of punched geotextile for heavy
drains textured soils
Semi-Arid 1–3 2 Medium 50–100
Woven nylon 60 mesh socks for
perforated collector pipes Humid 2–5 3 Heavy 20–50
Outlet To safely dispose Gravity outlets are used if deep Benefits of SSD technology: The SSD system has
of highly saline surface drain is available nearby multiple benefits in crop production such as improved
effluents Otherwise, pumped outlets with
soil health, enhanced crop yield, increase in farmers’
suitable pump
income and higher economic gains.
Indian Farming 49
November 2025
Case studies on SSD This improvement in soil salinity was mainly attributed
SSD in vertisols of Gujarat: Subsurface drainage to timely efforts from the farmer to ensure proper
system was installed in Adadara village of Bharuch drainage outflow from the sump. Forage crop was
district, having highly saline waterlogged black soil (ECe cultivated immediately after SSD installation and
more than 10 dS/m in all soil layers) in order to reduce subsequently decrease in soil salinity by SSD system
soil salinity and improve crop productivity. Prior to SSD made sugarcane cultivation possible with significantly
installation, farmers of the village literally abandoned higher yield (80 t/ha) resulting into yield enhancement
sugarcane cultivation due to highly unfavurable crop of more than 200%. Moreover, waterlogged conditions
growth conditions and very low yield (~25 t/ha). SSD improved with water table going below 1 m. Overall,
was installed in the month of February 2017 with a successful operation of SSD system for 4 years led to
lateral spacing of 35 m and data pertaining to soil, water effective desalinization of the soil profile and hence
and crop was collected at regular intervals. Depth wise improved soil quality, productivity and enhanced farm
temporal variation in soil salinity is pictorially depicted, income.
where in, drastic reduction in soil salinity (up to 86%) SSD in alluvial soils of Haryana: The study was
was observed. carried out at Kahni site of Rohtak district of Haryana
The average electrical conductivity of soil (ECe) was (India) where subsurface drainage system was installed
less than 4 dS/m in surface layer (0—30 cm) whereas in in 2016 in 160 ha land with 4 SSD drainage blocks. The
subsurface layers (30‒120 cm), it varied from 4 to 5.2 dS/m. depth of collector varied from 2.25–2.6 m and spacing of
EC (dS/m)
e
Temporal variation in soil salinity and crop performance at Adadara SSD site
50 Indian Farming
November 2025
)mc(
htped
Sugarcane
)ah/t(
dleiY
Before SSD After SSD
Electrical Conductivity, ECe (dS/m)
Reduction in soil salinity and enhanced crop productivity at Kahni SSD site
lateral pipe was 60 m. The collector pipe was connected average rice yield was merely 1.83 t/ha, and thus yield
with sump, installed in each SSD block near to surface enhancement of 138% was achieved. In wheat, average
drain. The excess water present in sub soil collected yield was found to be 1.65 and 4.03 t/ha, respectively for
from the entire field through installed perforated pipe before and after the introduction of SSD, resulting into
network to the sump and that was pumped in to the yield enhancement of 144%.
surface drain. Hence, salts were flushed out from the soil
SUMMARY
profile and created favourable environment for plant.
Properly designed and maintained subsurface
The drainage effluent carried away from the agricultural
drainage system helps in removal of excess water and
field through surface drainage network.
salts from the soil profile and subsequently enhances
A continuous change in salinity with time was
crop yield. The adoption of optimum drain spacing
recorded in whole soil profile which reveals an effective
as per the soil hydraulic properties and adequate
flushing of salts from the soil profile and disposal of
pumping in case of pumped outlet are the main factors
drainage effluent away from the affected area. The
governing the speed of reclamation of waterlogged
soil salinity in sub soil (20–60 cm) reduced to normal
(<4 dS/m) by the end of 3rd year of SSD installation. saline soils. Moreover, availability of trencher machine
and integration of laser guided grade control system in
Interestingly, this area was waterlogged and operation
semi-mechanized installation is very much essential to
of SSD ensured flushing of salt out of crop root zone by
increase the pace of installation of SSD system in India.
controlling groundwater level and facilitating leaching
Also adequate financial support should be provided to
process. The reduced salt load in soil translated into
the farmers through government schemes or subsidies
improved performance of rice-wheat crops. An average
for early and wider application of this technology in
yield of rice was recorded as 4.36 t/ha, and corresponding
severely affected areas.
surface (0–15 cm) soil salinity ranged between 3.4 to
5.70 dS/m after successful operation of SSD system of
*Corresponding author email: vibhutesagar5@gmail.com
2 consecutive years. While, before installation of SSD,
Indian Farming 51
November 2025
)mc(
htpeD
lioS
)ah/t(
dleiY
2019 2020
Wheat Rice
Share your experiences with
Indian Farming
Write to:
Editor
INDIAN FARMING
Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Krishi Anusandhan Bhavan I,
Pusa, New Delhi 110 012
editorindfarming@gmail.com
Indian Farming 75 (11): 52-55; November 2025
Commercial vegetable production
under protected structures in saline environments:
A promising strategy for livelihood security
R. L. Meena*, B. L. Meena, Priyanka Chandra, S. K. Sanwal and Bhaskar Narjary
ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
Salinity and water scarcity are major constraints in arid and semi-arid regions of India, where
a large share of groundwater is saline. Protected cultivation through polyhouses, shade nets and
tunnels provides a viable option for vegetable production under such environments. These structures
improve microclimate, enhance water and nutrient use efficiency and enable the safe utilization of
saline water. Crops like tomato, capsicum and chilli perform well under drip fertigation and raised-
bed systems in polyhouses. Technologies such as grafting, mulching, soilless media and saline water
blending reduce salt stress and improve yield and quality. With higher profitability, employment
generation and government support, protected cultivation offers a promising strategy for livelihood
and nutritional security.
Key words: Climate resilience, Livelihood security, Polyhouse, Protected cultivation,
Saline water irrigation, Vegetable production
IN India’s arid and semi-arid regions, the problem production, and support the safe use of saline water,
of water scarcity is particularly acute. States like ultimately improving crop quality and profitability.
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana, southwestern Punjab, and Vegetables are vital for human nutrition and farmer
northwestern Uttar Pradesh frequently face erratic and livelihoods. Their commercial value has grown rapidly,
low rainfall coupled with poor-quality groundwater. outpacing cereals in recent decades. In 2014–15,
Surveys report that 32–84% of the groundwater in vegetables were grown on just 2.8% of India’s cropped
these regions is saline or alkaline, severely affecting area, yielding 169.47 million tonnes from 9.52 million
sustainable crop production. However, studies suggest hectares. States like Haryana produced 5.5 lakh tonnes
that saline water with EC levels up to 11 dS/m can be from 373.17 thousand hectares, showing considerable
used successfully for certain crops when appropriate potential for growth (National Horticulture Board
irrigation methods are adopted. Among these, drip 2015). Given the twin challenges of water scarcity and
irrigation under protected cultivation has shown climate variability, there is an urgent need to promote
considerable promise by allowing precise water sustainable and innovative farming approaches. Efficient
application, minimizing salt stress, and protecting saline water use and expansion of protected vegetable
crop foliage. India’s diverse climate ranging from cultivation can play a key role in securing food supplies,
freezing winters to scorching summer sposes additional enhancing incomes, and sustaining agriculture under
challenges to open-field vegetable cultivation. Despite changing environmental conditions.
being the world’s second-largest vegetable producer,
India faces low per capita availability due to traditional Understanding salinity and its effects on crop
practices, low yields, and susceptibility to climatic stress. Salinity refers to the accumulation of soluble salts in
To meet rising demand and ensure nutritional security, soil and water, mainly sodium (Na⁺), chloride (Cl⁻), and
expanding vegetable production through improved sulfates (SO₄²⁻). These salts inhibit seed germination,
varieties and scientific farming methods is essential. disrupt nutrient uptake, reduce photosynthesis, and
Protected cultivation systems such as polyhouses, affect plant water relations. In vegetables, this leads
shade nets, low tunnels, and plastic mulches offer a to lower yields, poor-quality fruits, and in some cases,
sustainable solution. These structures create favourable complete crop failure. Among vegetables, tomato
growing conditions, reduce water use, enable off-season exhibits moderate tolerance to salinity, while crops
52 Indian Farming
November 2025
like cucumber and okra are more sensitive. Managing • Low tunnels: Temporary mini-structures that
salinity requires site-specific interventions, particularly protect seedlings and early-stage crops from salinity
when using saline water with electrical conductivity and temperature extremes.
(EC) above 2 dS/m. Additionally, prolonged exposure • Walk-in tunnels: Intermediate structures offering
to high salinity reduces microbial activity in soil, partial climate control with lower cost than full
negatively influencing nutrient mineralization. This greenhouses.
leads to nutrient deficiencies and imbalances in plants. Each structure type has unique advantages, and
Secondary stresses, such as oxidative stress from selection depends on crop type, location, economic
reactive oxygen species (ROS), also accumulate, further feasibility, and farmer experience.
impairing plant metabolism and growth.
Soil salinity can be classified as natural (primary) Suitable vegetable crops for saline protected cultivation
or induced (secondary), with secondary salinity often Many vegetables exhibit differential tolerance to
resulting from human interventions like improper salinity. Those with moderate tolerance, short duration,
irrigation practices and lack of drainage. Identifying and high value are preferred under protected cultivation
the type of salinity and implementing appropriate in saline condition. Other crops like spinach, lettuce,
agronomic and engineering solutions is essential for broccoli, coriander, and fenugreek also show promise
long-term management. under regulated environments with optimal nutrient
and water management.
Protected cultivation: An overview
Table 1. Salinity tolerance limits (ECiw) of selected vegetable crops
Protected cultivation or controlled-environment and recommended adaptation strategies for cultivation under saline
agriculture (CEA) uses structures such as greenhouses irrigation conditions
and polyhouses to shield crops from external stresses. Salinity tolerance
Crop Adaptation strategies
These systems facilitate: Better temperature and humidity (ECiw)
control, reduced pest and disease pressure, efficient water Tomato Up to 10 dS/m Grafting, drip irrigation
and nutrient use, and Enhanced crop quality and yield.
Capsicum Up to 6 dS/m Mulching, soilless media
CEA practices are particularly suited to India’s agro-
Raised beds, saline
climatic zones, enabling year-round vegetable production Green Chilli Up to 6 dS/m
water blending
even under extreme temperatures or degraded soils.
Eggplant Up to 3.5 dS/m Salt-tolerant rootstocks
These systems also enhance resource use efficiency
Shade net, frequent
critical in water-scarce, salinity-affected areas. Okra, Cucumber Up to 2.5 dS/m
leaching
Types of structures Leafy Greens Up to 2.0 dS/m Soilless cultivation,
misting systems
• Greenhouses: Fully controlled environments for
high-end production with temperature, humidity,
Pest and disease management
and CO₂ regulation.
Protected cultivation environments often create
• Polyhouses: Semi-controlled and cost-effective
favourable conditions for the rapid build-up of pests
structures ideal for smallholders using locally
and diseases, primarily due to high humidity levels.
available materials.
Effective management requires an integrated approach.
• Shade net houses: Simple and economical, reducing
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) combines cultural,
light intensity and preventing heat stress. Ideal for
biological, and chemical control methods to ensure
nursery production.
Drip-irrigated tomato seedlings planted in raised beds inside a naturally ventilated polyhouse
Indian Farming 53
November 2025
Performance of capsicum and tomato under 10 dS/m saline water irrigation
Performance of chilli under 10 dS/m saline water irrigation
sustainable crop protection. The use of bioagents such as Techniques for salinity management in protected cultivation
Trichoderma, Pseudomonas, and neem-based biopesticides To maximize vegetable performance under saline
helps in reducing the dependence on synthetic conditions, specific practices and technologies are
chemicals. Preventive measures like insect-proof netting adopted in protected cultivation systems. These reduce
and yellow sticky traps are useful in controlling insect salt accumulation in the root zone and improve crop
vectors. Maintaining proper sanitation and practicing resilience.
crop rotation help minimize the carryover of pathogens • Soilless media: Substrates like cocopeat, perlite, and
between crop cycles. Additionally, advanced monitoring vermiculite offer excellent drainage and aeration,
tools including pheromone traps, thermal foggers, and which dilute salt effects and promote root health.
decision-support system said in early detection and • Leaching salts through controlled irrigation: Excess
timely intervention, thereby reducing crop losses and
salts can be leached below the root zone by applying
enhancing productivity.
controlled volumes of low-salinity water through
Table 2. Key challenges in protected cultivation under saline drip irrigation or during off-season flushing.
environments and corresponding mitigation strategies Periodic leaching maintains the root zone EC within
Challenge Solution acceptable limits.
High capital cost Government subsidies; FPO or SHG-based • Use of grafted plants for improved salt resistance:
ownership Grafting salt-sensitive scions onto salt-tolerant
Salinity build-up Drainage, gypsum use, rotation with salt- rootstocks improves the plant’s physiological
tolerant crops
tolerance to salinity. Grafted tomatoes and melons
Skill gap Training by ICAR/KVKs, demo units, mobile
exhibit improved water uptake, nutrient absorption,
apps
and reduced sodium translocation to shoots. This
Pest/disease IPM practices, regular monitoring
outbreak technique is gaining popularity in saline-prone
Climate stress Thermally insulated covers, side vents, misting regions under protected farming.
Market access Linking with FPOs, digital platforms, • Salt-tolerant cultivars and hybrids: Selecting salt-
cooperative models tolerant vegetable varieties or hybrids is the most
Input availability Localized production of seedlings, nutrient kits sustainable long-term approach. Examples include
54 Indian Farming
November 2025
salt-tolerant cultivars of tomato (e.g. ‘PusaRohini’), Table 3. Yield and gross returns of selected vegetable crops under
chilli (e.g. ‘Pusa Sadabahar’), and brinjal (e.g., ‘Arka protected cultivation in an area of 300 m²
Neelkanth’). Protected environments further buffer Vegetable Crop Yield (q/300m²) Gross Returns (`)
these cultivars from abiotic stress, enhancing yields.
Tomato 31.75 1,98,099
• Mulching to reduce evaporation and surface salt
Capsicum 12.89 1,38,052
accumulation: Mulching with plastic films or
Green Chilli 10.78 1,15,525
organic materials (e.g. straw, compost) minimizes
soil evaporation, thereby reducing upward salt • Total Production Cost: `2,15,623
movement. Helps maintain stable soil temperature • Net Present Value (NPV): `6,25,711
and moisture. Reduces weed pressure and promotes
• Benefit-Cost Ratio (BCR): 1.41
beneficial microbial activity in the root zone.
• Payback Period: 2 years
Water management in protected cultivation • Climate resilience through protected structures
Efficient water management is essential for successful against extreme weather
crop production under protected cultivation, especially • Higher employment due to labour-intensive nature
in saline environments. Drip irrigation delivers water of precision farming
directly to the root zone, minimizing evaporation losses
and ensuring efficient use. Fertigation, which combines Policy support and future prospects
irrigation with fertilizers, allows for precise nutrient The Government of India has taken several initiatives
application while maintaining salt balance in the root to promote protected cultivation, recognizing its
zone. Rainwater harvesting systems are useful for potential to enhance productivity, improve resource
collecting and storing quality water, helping to dilute use efficiency, and ensure year-round vegetable
salts and reduce long-term salinity buildup. Blending supply. Key schemes such as Mission for Integrated
saline water with fresh water ensures that the electrical Development of Horticulture (MIDH), Rashtriya
conductivity (EC) of irrigation water stays within crop- Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), National Horticulture
specific safe limits. Subsurface drainage systems aid Board (NHB), and National Mission for Sustainable
in leaching accumulated salts and maintaining overall Agriculture (NMSA) provide strong policy backing.
soil health. Additionally, automated irrigation systems Farmers can benefit from various forms of assistance
equipped with soil moisture sensors help regulate water including capital subsidies of up to 75%, credit-linked
flow accurately, ensuring crops receive the right amount back-ended subsidies, and technical guidance through
of water at the right time. ICAR institutes. Moreover, protected cultivation is now
recognized under priority sector lending through the
Nutrient managementin protected cultivation Agri-Infrastructure Fund, encouraging investment in
Proper nutrient management is critical for climate-resilient technologies. Looking ahead, future
maintaining soil fertility and crop productivity under prospects for protected cultivation are promising with
protected and saline conditions. Balanced application the integration of digital tools for precision fertigation,
of macronutrients (NPK) and micronutrients, tailored to adoption of solar-powered irrigation systems, and
the specific crop and growth stage, ensures optimal plant the development of carbon credit models that reward
development. In sodic soils, gypsum (calcium sulfate) climate-smart practices. Technologies like blockchain
is applied to replace sodium ions and improve soil can enhance traceability and help farmers achieve
structure. Foliar sprays of micronutrients like iron (Fe), premium prices, while e-commerce platforms offer
zinc (Zn), and manganese (Mn) help correct deficiencies new avenues for direct-to-consumer vegetable sales,
often caused by high soil pH. Regular monitoring strengthening market linkages and farmer profitability.
of parameters such as EC, sodium adsorption ratio
(SAR), and pH is essential to prevent salt accumulation SUMMARY
and nutrient toxicity. The use of organic fertilizers Protected cultivation under saline environments
and microbial inoculants further enhances nutrient offers a viable pathway for sustainable vegetable
availability, improves soil health, and increases crop production. It helps utilize degraded lands and brackish
resilience to environmental stress. water efficiently, generating high income from small
holdings. With suitable policy, institutional, and
Economic feasibility and farmer benefits technical support, it can transform rural economies by
Protected cultivation offers substantial returns, ensuring food, income, and nutritional security in salt-
especially when market demand and quality affected areas. Farmers must be empowered through
premiums are considered. Polyhouse production capacity-building, public-private partnerships, and
ensures round-the-year employment and income, inclusive market linkages. Scaling these systems across
especially for women and youth. Surplus production India’s saline zones could play a pivotal role in achieving
may be marketed directly or through FPOs. Additional rural prosperity and climate-resilient agriculture.
benefits include:
• Promotion of women entrepreneurship through
nursery and value-addition units *Corresponding author email: rlmeena69@gmail.com
Indian Farming 55
November 2025
e-mail : businessuniticar@gmail.com
56 Indian Farming
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 57-60; November 2025
Use of modern digital techniques for
mapping and assessment of salt-affected soils
Amresh Chaudhary1*, Sandeep Kumar2, Nirmalendu Basak3,
Parul Sundha1, Priyanka Chandra1 and A. K. Rai1
1ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana 132 001
2ICAR-National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning, Regional Centre, Jorhat, Assam 785 004
3ICAR-National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning, Regional Centre, Kolkata 700 091
Soil salinity is a growing global challenge, threatening agricultural productivity and food security.
Conventional methods for diagnosing salt-affected soils such as visual inspection, field sampling,
and laboratory testing have long provided essential insights but remain time-consuming, costly,
and limited in spatial coverage. Recent advances in geospatial technologies, particularly remote
sensing, geographic information systems (GIS), and machine learning (ML), are transforming
how soil salinity is detected, mapped, and managed. Optical remote sensing now enables large-
scale monitoring by capturing spectral signals linked to salinity stress, while predictive algorithms
such as random forests, support vector machines, and neural networks enhance mapping accuracy
across diverse landscapes. Digital Soil Mapping (DSM) builds on these innovations by integrating
multi-source environmental data with advanced models to generate high-resolution, continuous
maps of soil salinity, offering actionable intelligence for precision agriculture. In India, pioneering
applications of DSM have shown promising results, from improving fertilizer efficiency and
water use in Maharashtra to large-scale initiatives like the Soil Intelligence System in Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, and Odisha. The ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (CSSRI) has also
advanced national-level salinity mapping efforts, combining legacy soil data with remote sensing
and ML approaches. Emerging tools such as UAVs further add local-scale precision, enabling
dynamic monitoring of soil health. Together, these developments illustrate how DSM is reshaping
salinity diagnostics, bridging science and practice, and paving the way for more sustainable land
management strategies in the face of climate change and increasing soil degradation.
Keywords: Digital soil mapping, Machine learning, Remote sensing, Soil salinity
SOIL salinity, the accumulation of excessive salts in the presence of these soils traditionally involves measuring
soil, is one of the primary causes of soil degradation the electrical conductivity (EC) and sodium adsorption
globally. According to the Food and Agriculture ratio (SAR) of the soil.
Organization (FAO), salt-affected soils (SAS) cover 1381 While traditional diagnostic methods are critical for
million hectares or 10.7 % of total land area globally, with soil health assessments, they face significant challenges,
the extent increasing in regions that depend heavily on including being labour-intensive and spatially limited.
irrigation. The spread of SAS is expected to worsen due Furthermore, such methods often lack the ability to
to the dual impacts of climate change and unsustainable provide high-resolution spatial data on soil salinity,
agricultural practices (FAO 2024). especially across large areas.
Classification and diagnostic methods for salt-affected soils Advancements in geospatial technologies for salt-affected soil
SAS can be classified into saline and sodic soils based diagnostics
on their composition and properties. Saline soils have Recent advancements in geospatial technologies have
high concentrations of soluble salts, while sodic soils revolutionized the monitoring and mapping of SAS.
are characterized by excess sodium. Diagnosing the Remote sensing (RS), geographic information systems
Indian Farming 57
November 2025
(GIS), and machine learning (ML) techniques have and neural networks offering superior predictive
enabled the large-scale, high-resolution mapping of performance compared to traditional geostatistical
salt-affected areas. The integration of these technologies methods like Kriging. Each has its strengths: Neural
allows for the creation of digital soil maps that provide networks can capture complex non₋linear relationships,
predictive, continuous data on soil salinity across vast while RF reduces the risk of overfitting. Although no
regions. universal algorithm has emerged as the global “best fit,”
machine learning consistently outperforms traditional
Remote sensing and soil salinity detection methods for salinity prediction.
Salt-affected soils (SAS) are a major challenge for However, challenges remain. For example, in
farmers, especially in arid and semi-arid regions where agricultural areas, spectral signatures of saline soils
white crusts of salt often appear on the surface, stunting can be confused with other bright surfaces like roads,
crops and reducing yields. Traditionally, diagnosing buildings, or even nearby salt ponds. Vegetation-
and mapping these soils relied on physical inspections, based indices such as NDVI (Normalized Difference
soil testing, and expert judgment. For instance, farmers Vegetation Index), EVI (Enhanced Vegetation Index), or
and soil scientists would look for visible salt crusts, poor the Canopy Responsive Salinity Index (CRSI) are often
vegetation cover, or stressed plants as warning signs. Field used as indirect measures, since salinity affects crop
surveys and sampling at different depths then helped growth and canopy temperature. Yet no single index
determine the extent and severity of salt accumulation. In works equally well across all regions. The Vegetation
the 1990s, researchers even started using satellite images Soil Salinity Index (VSSI), for instance, is effective in
in “false colour” mode, where experts drew boundaries coastal zones but often misclassifies dry, bare soils as
around areas that looked similar in colour, brightness, saline in arid regions.
or texture—essentially hand-mapping salinity based To overcome these hurdles, scientists are increasingly
on experience. While these conventional methods have turning to Digital Soil Mapping (DSM). DSM combines
played a crucial role, they are far from perfect: They are remote sensing data with environmental variables
time-consuming, labour-intensive, and limited to discrete such as climate, topography, and land use, and uses
sampling points that cannot capture the full variation of predictive models to generate continuous maps of soil
salinity across large landscapes. salinity. Unlike conventional mapping or simple index-
This is where modern geospatial technologies have based methods, DSM can capture spatial variability
changed the game. By combining remote sensing, GIS, more accurately and is adaptable to diverse landscapes.
and machine learning, scientists can now map salinity In effect, DSM is helping move soil salinity studies
with much greater accuracy and efficiency. Instead of from isolated observations toward dynamic, data-
collecting hundreds of soil samples, satellite data can driven solutions that support precision agriculture and
be fed into predictive models to estimate soil salinity sustainable land management.
over entire districts or regions. This approach provides
a continuous picture of salt distribution and allows for Digital soil mapping (DSM)
large-scale monitoring something that was impossible DSM is a powerful approach for predicting soil
with traditional methods. properties over large areas using geospatial data and
RS in particular has become a powerful ally in the fight advanced modeling techniques. The SCORPAN model
against soil salinity. Satellites can capture information is often used in DSM to predict soil properties by
from areas that are difficult to reach, track changes integrating spatial and environmental covariates such
over time, and even distinguish subtle differences in as climate, topography, parent material, and vegetation.
soil or vegetation health. Optical remote sensing uses The equation for DSM is typically represented as
spectral reflectance—how soils and plants reflect light SCORPAN model given below:
at different wavelengths to infer salinity levels. For S= f (S, C, O, R, P, A, N) +ε
example, stressed plants or bare salty patches reflect Where S, Soil attributes at an unvisited location; f,
light differently from healthy vegetation, providing Numerical model (e.g. decision tree, random forest,
clues about underlying soil conditions. With frequent deep learning); C, Climatic properties; O, Organisms,
satellite passes, scientists can monitor how salinity vegetation, or human activity; R, Relief or slope; P, Parent
changes over months or years, offering valuable insights material, lithology; A, Time factor (age); N, Location or
for land management. relative spatial information; ε, Auto-correlated random
Studies have shown that newer satellites like spatial variation.
Sentinel-2 perform better than older ones like Landsat, So, DSM can be defined as computer-assisted
largely due to their higher resolution (10 meters vs. production of digital interpolated maps of soil
30 meters) and more frequent coverage (every 5 days properties using machine learning, deep learning,
instead of 16). Sentinel data has been found to predict soil ensemble models or other statistical models that pool
salinity with about 70% accuracy, compared to 66% for information from soil observations with information
Landsat. But satellites alone are not enough—scientists contained in correlated environmental variables as
also use algorithms ranging from simple regression mentioned earlier in the previous paragraph as climate,
models to advanced machine learning techniques like organisms (presented through various remote sensing
Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machines (SVM), based indices), relief and parent material.
58 Indian Farming
November 2025
The application of DSM for salt-affected soils helps have been made in the tools and methodologies used
in producing high-resolution, continuous maps that for soil salinity mapping. Recently, Mandal et al. (2023)
overcome the limitations of traditional polygon-based generated a coastal salinity map using linear regression
mapping. DSM also benefits from the integration of models, integrating laboratory-measured electrical
remote sensing data, GIS, and other environmental data conductivity of saturation paste extract (ECe) data
sources, allowing for real-time updates and dynamic from various coastal locations with remote sensing
monitoring of soil salinity. indices. Their study estimated that approximately 1.294
million hectares of coastal land are affected by salinity.
Case studies related to use of DSM in India However, a comprehensive and high-resolution map
DSM is quietly transforming Indian agriculture, of salt-affected soils across the entire country is still
with several success stories showing how data and lacking.
technology can reshape the way farmers manage their To address this gap, CSSRI has initiated the
soils. In Maharashtra’s Vidarbha region, often associated development DSM of salt-affected soils at the national
with low productivity and farmer distress, digital soil level using advanced machine learning algorithms.
health mapping using IoT sensors and geospatial tools These models integrate field observations with multi-
has helped cotton and soybean growers cut fertilizer use source remote sensing datasets to generate predictive
by nearly 15%, save 20% water, and still boost yields by maps of salt-affected areas across India, offering
25–30%. In Odisha’s Khordha district, GIS-based nutrient improved spatial accuracy and aiding in evidence-based
maps revealed that more than 70% of farmland was acidic management and reclamation strategies.
and nitrogen-deficient, giving farmers and policymakers
the evidence they needed for targeted soil amendments. Integration of UAVs in DSM for salt-affected soils
Further east, in Assam’s Upper Brahmaputra Valley, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have emerged as
researchers applied machine learning to predict soil an important tool in DSM, particularly for local-scale soil
organic carbon across silk-producing landscapes, mapping. UAVs offer high-resolution data acquisition,
providing vital insights into carbon storage and flexibility in data collection, and the ability to operate
sustainable land management. In Tamil Nadu, in inaccessible areas. Studies have demonstrated their
scientists used legacy soil data with advanced models potential for mapping soil organic carbon (SOC) and
like Random Forest to generate 250-meter resolution other soil properties, which are essential for assessing
maps of soil depth, texture, and coarse fragments, soil salinity.
producing invaluable tools for precision farming and
environmental planning. Large-scale initiatives are also Future perspectives and challenges
underway: Soil Intelligence System (SIS) in Andhra The future of DSM in salt-affected soils will rely on
Pradesh, Bihar, and Odisha is combining soil health further integration of machine learning, remote sensing,
card data, geo-statistics, and digital dashboards to create and environmental covariates to enhance predictive
user-friendly soil maps built on FAIR data principles, accuracy. Challenges remain in handling large-scale
while Bihar Agricultural University has embarked on datasets, overcoming the impact of cloud cover, and
a state-wide digital soil mapping programme aiming improving sensor fusion techniques for better salinity
to cover all 38 districts by 2028. Together, these efforts detection across diverse land uses. The development of
demonstrate how DSM
can empower farmers with
actionable knowledge, reduce
costs, improve soil health, and
set Indian agriculture on a
more sustainable and resilient
path.
CSSRI's initiatives in digital soil
mapping of salt-affected soils
The ICAR-Central Soil
Salinity Research Institute
(CSSRI) had developed a
computerized database
and visual interpretation-
based maps of salt-affected
soils, including saline,
sodic, and saline-sodic
categories, covering the
entire country. Over time,
significant advancements
Flow chart of digital soil mapping technique (AI-generated image)
Indian Farming 59
November 2025
hybrid models and the incorporation of more remote learning techniques, DSM offers a more efficient, cost-
sensing variables, such as land management practices effective, and precise way to monitor salt-affected soils.
and climate variability, will help improve the accuracy The continued advancement of these technologies,
and reliability of DSM. along with the development of more refined modelling
approaches, will enable better soil management and land
use planning, contributing to sustainable agricultural
SUMMARY
practices and land conservation efforts.
Digital Soil Mapping (DSM) represents the future
of soil salinity diagnostics. By integrating advanced
*Corresponding author email: amu8805@gmail.com
remote sensing, geospatial technologies, and machine
E-mail: businessuniticar@gmail.com
Importance of Millets and Improved Technologies
“Importance of Millets and Improved Technologies” This book is an excellent compilation
of knowledge of importance of Millets and improved production technologies which is essential to
create awareness among the end users for their promotion. Millets are being utilized for various
purposes such as food, feed, fodder and more recently, as bio-fuel.
For this information, importance of different millet crops in our livelihood and their technological
advancement has been compiled in this monogram. This will be of immense value to the researchers,
academicians, end-users and policymakers alike to promote millets farming.
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
Pages: v + 183; Price: ` 700.00, US$ 90.00; Postage: `50
ISBN No.: 978-81-7164-272-4
SCAN QR Code to
For obtaining copies, please contact: Purchase Online
Business Unit
ICAR- Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan – I, Pusa, New Delhi 110012
Tel: 011-25843657; email: businessuniticar@gmail.com
website: www.icar.org.in
60 Indian Farming
November 2025
Indian Farming 75 (11): 61-63; November 2025
Waste wool technology in arid
horticulture: Promoting sustainability and circular economy
Anita Meena*, M. K. Jatav, Manpreet Kaur and R. P. Meena
ICAR-Central Institute for Arid Horticulture, Bikaner, Rajasthan 334 006
Arid and semi-arid regions face significant agricultural limitations due to environmental and
soil-related challenges such as erratic rainfall, poor soil fertility, and extreme temperatures. These
constraints hinder horticultural productivity, which relies on stable soil moisture and nutrient
availability. To promote sustainability and productivity in these regions, attention has shifted
toward using locally available resources. One such resource is waste wool, a by-product of sheep
rearing is an important livelihood in arid zones. Though unsuitable for textiles, waste wool is rich in
organic carbon and nutrients, making it an effective soil amendment. When applied to horticultural
systems, it improves soil structure by increasing porosity, moisture retention, and organic content.
This not only enhances plant growth in harsh climates but also promotes ecological sustainability.
Moreover, utilizing waste wool reduces agricultural input costs, turning a low-value by-product
into a valuable resource. This practice strengthens the resilience of arid-zone horticulture and
supports rural economies by aligning with circular economy principles. Overall, use of waste wool
offers a practical and sustainable solution to improve soil health, increase productivity, and support
environmental stewardship in arid and semi-arid regions.
Keywords: Ecological, Rural economies, Soil health
A substantial quantity of organic waste and by- practices that rely heavily on chemical inputs and non-
products is generated globally each year, much renewable resources. The urgency of such innovations
of which holds significant potential for reuse within has been amplified by the increasing challenges facing
agricultural and horticultural systems. Among these global agriculture. Climate change has intensified the
by-products, waste generated by the wool industry frequency of droughts, heatwaves, and erratic rainfall,
represents an underutilized resource with considerable particularly in arid and semi-arid regions where
value for sustainable farming. The global wool industry water scarcity severely constraints crop production.
produces millions of tonnes of wool annually, but a large Additionally, continuous land use, overreliance on
fraction of this yield is categorized as waste, as well as chemical fertilizers, and unsustainable cultivation
due to fiber irregularities or poor quality unsuitable for practices have accelerated soil degradation, reducing
textile applications. Traditionally, much of this wool fertility and organic matter content while increasing
waste has been discarded in landfills or incinerated, susceptibility to erosion and salinization. These
leading not only to environmental degradation but also challenges necessitate the adoption of ecologically sound
to a significant loss of potential organic resources. The and resource efficient methods that not only maintain
growing recognition of the circular economy framework productivity but also enhance the resilience of cropping
has emphasized the need to reintegrate such waste systems. Against this backdrop, wool waste offers
streams into productive cycles. Within this paradigm, unique advantages as a renewable, biodegradable, and
agricultural and horticultural systems are seen as key nutrient-rich material that can be harnessed to improve
sectors for integrating organic by-products, since soils soil quality and plant growth.
can act as natural sinks for biodegradable residues. Chemically, wool is primarily composed of keratin
The reutilization of waste wool in horticultural proteins, along with other fibrous proteins such as
production thus fits seamlessly into this approach, collagen and elastin. These proteins are rich in nitrogen,
providing a sustainable alternative to conventional sulfur, and carbon, which are essential elements for
Indian Farming 61
November 2025
soil degradation, and water scarcity.
By aligning with the principles of
the circular economy, adoption of
wool waste technology contributes
not only to enhancing productivity
and resilience in arid regions but
also to reducing the environmental
footprint of agriculture. As research
and innovation in this field continue,
waste wool has the potential to play
a significant role in shaping future
strategies for sustainable and climate-
resilient horticulture.The utilization of
wool waste as a soil amendment offers
numerous benefits, primarily due to
its inherent properties that enhance
soil health and support sustainable
agricultural practices.
• Moisture conservation: Waste
wool, rich in nitrogen and protein,
acts as an effective mulching
material. It significantly conserves
water by reducing evaporation
Waste wool application under drip irrigation in arid region
from the soil surface, making
plant growth. During decomposition, wool fibers it particularly valuable in arid
release these nutrients slowly, making them available and semi-arid regions. This property can partially
over extended periods and reducing the risk of leaching or fully replace conventional chemical fertilizers,
losses that are often associated with synthetic fertilizers. promoting resource-efficient farming.
This controlled nutrient release contributes to long-term • Organic mulch: When applied as an organic mulch,
soil fertility and supports sustainable crop production. waste wool enhances the soil's water-holding
In addition to its nutrient profile, the fibrous structure capacity and creates a more favourable environment
of wool improves the physical properties of soil. When for soil microflora, boosting microbial activity and
applied as a soil amendment, wool enhances porosity, biodiversity. It also stabilizes soil temperatures,
aeration, and water infiltration, thereby facilitating protecting plant roots from extreme thermal stress.
better root penetration and nutrient uptake by plants. This leads to improved soil health and better plant
Another important attribute of wool waste is its performance.
exceptional capacity for water retention. Wool fibers can • Soil amendment: Incorporated into the soil, waste
absorb moisture up to several times their own weight, wool fibers improve soil structure by increasing
gradually releasing it into the soil and maintaining a porosity, which enhances air circulation and water
more stable micro₋environment around the plant roots. infiltration. This is especially beneficial for sandy
This feature is especially beneficial in arid and semi-arid or degraded soils, improving their water retention
regions where water availability is the most limiting and supporting better plant growth and drought
factor for horticultural production. By conserving soil resilience.
moisture and reducing the frequency of irrigation, wool • Organic fertilizer: Waste wool is a valuable organic
mulch or amendments can help farmers adapt to water source of essential plant nutrients, typically
scarcity and improve water-use efficiency. Furthermore, containing about 50% carbon, 16–17% nitrogen, and
when used as mulch, wool suppresses weed growth by 3–4% sulfur. It functions as a slow-release fertilizer
limiting light penetration to the soil surface, reducing due to its complex chemical structure, which resists
competition for water and nutrients. It also buffers rapid microbial degradation. While pre-treatment
soil temperature fluctuations, protecting delicate root methods like hydrolysis can accelerate nutrient
systems from extreme heat in summer and cold in availability, its application demonstrably improves
winter. soil organic carbon and nitrogen, enhancing long-
In summary, the utilization of waste wool in term soil fertility and productivity.
horticultural systems offers a compelling example
of how agricultural by-products can be reimagined Waste wool: A sustainable solution for horticulture in hot
as valuable resources. Its rich nutrient composition, arid zones
water-holding capacity, biodegradability, and soil- Hot arid zones globally grapple with agricultural
improving properties make it a promising input for challenges like low and erratic rainfall, extreme
sustainable horticulture. At the same time, it addresses temperatures, poor soil fertility, and limited organic
pressing challenges related to waste management, matter. These factors restrict crop productivity and
62 Indian Farming
November 2025
Crop performance under waste wool application
threaten the livelihoods of farming communities. supports the establishment of vegetative cover in
Interestingly, these very regions are also home to fragile landscapes. Economically, it lowers input costs,
significant sheep-rearing activities, which generate large increases sustainability, and provides added value
quantities of waste wool that is unsuitable for textile to otherwise discarded wool, benefiting resource-
industries due to its coarse texture, contamination, or constrained farming communities.Thus, waste wool
low quality. This waste wool presents a remarkable emerges as a low-cost, eco-friendly, and sustainable
opportunity for horticulture in arid ecosystems. When solution for improving horticulture in hot arid zones
applied to barren or degraded soils, waste wool helps while simultaneously strengthening livestock₋crop
create a favourable micro₋environment for plant integration.
growth. Its fibrous structure captures and retains
atmospheric moisture, fostering a localized humid SUMMARY
microclimate that stimulates microbial activity. This Integration of waste wool into arid horticulture
microbial proliferation enhances nutrient cycling, provides a sustainable resource efficient approach to
improves soil structure, and gradually increases organic address the challenges of arid zone. The waste wool has
matter, making the soil more fertile and conducive to the potential of being used as a mulch, soil amendment
and organic fertilizer owing to its fibrous structure,
crop production. Waste wool also functions as a natural
nutrient content and moisture retention capacity. Owing
mulch, conserving soil moisture, regulating temperature
to resource poor structure of arid zones, use of waste
fluctuations, and suppressing weeds critical benefits
wool as a horticultural or horticultural input contributes
under arid conditions.
to circular economy and prevents environmental
Crops grown with wool based amendments can
biodegradation. The environmental benefits of waste
serve as fodder for sheep, reintegrating livestock and
wool use along with its economic advantage makes it a
horticultural systems while closing nutrient loops.
suitable option for promotion of sustainable horticulture
This innovative recycling model minimizes waste,
in arid zone.
enhances resource efficiency, and reduces reliance on
external synthetic inputs. Environmentally, it promotes
*Corresponding author email: anumeena5@gmail.com
soil rehabilitation, combats land degradation, and
Indian Farming 63
November 2025
Textbook Basic Mushroom
of Water Statistical Cultivation Harvesting Techniques Page x+134 and Soil in Animal Rs `600 Conservation Breeding Postage `100 Structures Page viii+211 US $85 Page viii+376 Rs `700 Rs `1000 Postage `100
Postage `100 US $90
US $150
Fundamentals Processable Handbook of ICAR
of Fodder Varieties/ Agricultural Guidelines for
and Hybrids of Engineering Evaluation of
Grassland Horticultural (Revised Probiotics in
Production Crops Edition) Livestock and
Page vi+354 Page viii+168 Page xii+1188 Poultry
Rs `600 Rs `100 Rs `2000 Page x+22
Postage `100 Postage `50 Postage `200 Rs `50
US $90 US $15 US $300 Postage `50
US $8
ehBkty lfCt;ksa esa nyguh
eehhBBkkttyy dd``ff""kk iizzkkSS||kkssffxxddhh llss vvkkffFFkkZZdd mmRRFFkkkkuu Ñf"k dhVksa ,oa ÝQlyksa çkS|ksfxdh ls jksxksa dk dh lqj{kk vkfFkZd vk/qfud Page xii+448 mRFkku izca/u Rs `1000 Postage `100 Page xii+320 Page xii+448
Rs `800 Rs `860
Postage `100 Postage `50
HHkkkkjjrrhh;; dd``ffu””kkb Z vvfnuuYyqqllhaa//kkkkuu iiffjj””kknn
1. Payment should be made through Bank Draft in favour of “Business Manager, ICAR, New Delhi”.
2. A 10% discount will be admissible on direct purchase of Books (only) from sales counter (DKMA) at Ground Floor,
KAB-I, Pusa Campus, New Delhi-110012.
3. Libraries are entitled for discount of 15% excluding Magazines/Journals.
4. Textbooks and other publications can be purchased online also (QR code at bottom).
5. Payment through RTGS/NEFT mode is accepted.
Incharge, Business Unit SCAN QR Code to
Purchase Online
For Publications Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
and Advertisement
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan-l, Pusa Campus, New Delhi 110012
please contact
Tel: 011-25843657; bhupinder.icar@nic.in; businessuniticar@gmail.com
Website: www.icar.org.in
64 Indian Farming
November 2025
ehBkty d`f"k izkS|ksfxdh ls vkfFkZd
mRFkku
ehBkty d`f"k izkS|ksfxdh ls ehBkty d`f"k izkS|ksfxdh ls nyguh Qlyksa ee H cn ^ u i f e t –d; r ; v g t d g l ^ dk e k qL R k R k h k { o f d k k u r y s y s ; s s x x B " " sx st LLk r h k h Vç r B qç r ;; u m k u k k h h — n — d u s¶t t A A df k ; k && h e r r í k t y d k " "x u ; k y v s' k v s k a v k e lc e sx s. d d ç ‚ y ; zk h ar c h dk k k e sa k ] g sr k L tSj sa ' e k k k l < sa h h e sa sa S sa A r v q d k d v — . h +r d k i, kd , B R d qr k j k / k oL s s m f h ;o f g ok Sj k k k " cFs f u ; s S tl f s sg k a h R f a o k ' k O f v h d Zioi Z k d i ; v V w y ] t p k o d ç y u sa F qju k k k k ªh ; l d u k n R , y g k k o . V v k S| p e d x v l ek q: ku h f l & u O h e a g f Z k f : v L R ; ; k g h u ] sf Ø o i Sj k L e `r r x r t f SA k n f H jd ; ] ; l o k r { r y j d k u u ; wj SlZ k j ib d v g r f s= t ; d hh k r j h i t v kl s k f H ki Uf y g D f rd k k j k j r l Q; j ky o w. # r e d k x sa u v d iy k k k " ç s V' d f s Z i V sa r d f v qL p s k k e k d f k h d v qL Sj s F V o r ª h k , e k l R ; be r e f i ' k h e d d L h k v H k d v F ; u Z k / e d o k g ; Z d scN u k h ; y u k d Zd k k k k y Sji k e / s o d l / y e od f b l {k k j / ok sa q h f q t v k ; k y y ;h u u m h v r u s p e L t H m l k k y kl u r d r k u h R s l a sa k k u i h hu F ,j s d d H , e v k g— r R r k k k j g k k ç f q v o y ke sa h SA I F er h k k u k " S r . y af b s ld f k l k u ' f sa k ; ç k * f R t d dÞ d d Z& * k n v d k j e zk k f ] k s y n d d s r o s k [ h k u L i o ' u f k sM s s ' a k H e u d i h ; d k ] ku qL . v h k k k r d : +rç d h k wf H u dk r g f sr r SE Zu k k O s e l ns sj Zj i d k i ' d ; k h h Z g g s t i sa sa k k h r d f d k u v k m ç q,j q, u q l Lc d o d fSl d r e h sj ] r iR k u x g b— s ; s i dv h . ys h e k m d k l Z ; k k zl y k l f f k u k u k k " j j n r [ U r gg j ax k j s u x u wp r d f ql Þ k ç u h ySA d d eu l sr o r ; s d u i n v a/ z s a u h h ;g { ka d yqL , k d k y ] k x j k vk ç l k u h r SaAu k Sj e o u g d , s[ Y f s h t j k g d r a r S i j x SA o s k k e d l ; Ø k l v d k sx k e s a] k a ; ; f R ] l g v i rg j k l k sa k & Lo o k Sj F d k af l l l sa sx qL t ; ; r s f S S K K k af p H i u r & m u g j gh al { i k ß k k k k sa qL ;k s d df S] n f l H k f f j k r s t = l k g v ; u u r y k b / k k j t k k u F an h k ud d d d d ) Sl l k j F ; r u u e kSj ß k h k h k ]sa s s s s vkfF i/i k aduze Zd t' atk k sn Sy ; d s' d d kqe qe m kqe lj kk j k j Sj f rH R lo ko k F eg kjkq Zh kku dh lqj{kk
ISBN:978-81-7164-295-3
www.icar.org.in
nyguh Qlyksa dh lqj{kk
MushroGoumid eC utolt ivation Mushroo G m uid e C t u o l tivation Fish Pro T c e e x s t s b in o g o k Te o c f hnology t e e hK g od ga hmd eU se M r e x is r sf ae fi i y s e V vf f f u e a p v c s ve p u f f e m e - md d e e se e i e l ep c b c o s i h l n r r u i g c e u t li u c j l a e en r s e i th a i b n il aa s p ol i n n n t g ct at e d h l ba o e i t , a t t l t l d et y o d r . o m ic m m l h a o a t o n eu r e b t a o m i s ao o u h u m s s s t e s b c a s m c s e w s c t i n p p tsn i t o h i e h oi c l e e s a o o s v e o m r r n , t f l i t f e t o t od l n u i h re s e a a t p h o a o o c d t s e n n n c f i s i y m o m ma r le t i o t t d e d o p um n i p i g n f a s a d s m s o t l d o s t m o, l l o ep p s c u a s s i a t b i o n ra a hu p t n n h o b u n o e g u so a d f e s s r v p d d r . h n e i t w ia l a r a - g e u e r c gr t d a T g d a n n o w o os c r u h p s sr t ue i e t n - o p , i i l e f p e e d a cm a la i t t m a g r s y c u e n r a h a r t o t o a p o e a l i d t te s e v d t nh n o e h l ll, u e ds e e u l ha t t d f aa i t r g o hm mv c fa u ae tt e a a o f r t e e e v c d o i a i p t s m a r o e g c s c am e r p m r n ol t o r n m r e o o n b e o r d oi a a u, w ua t t oe c w p n s d n s a na n t n ef f t l us v n di lt o e t fnf t n l id . a a t o a i m t n r o e r g o n i k rt o T a m e i t d f e p t i f cia t h d n n t i f v c p he i o o . s u i n t o g i h c t s o es At c r n i l h u en a -i t i m r m g a i h e a a e b r l m n tt b t h l a e n e n y ny uo i o a em v l l i dn p c d t a s o y s nn n n a e t oe h r k f u g t d n , e t n D s eo nr o r i sf u . o o t o t h m , r w r e i o h h T e t w t t n i o it s . c r r g i h e e n h l m vi o h h O o a l h t d e s e t e p i o i r f i n e oi i c b i r e p n o c c v m rf h c yu e t u i i e r e sa b n pt h h e s is l h x . e n c s t r a r n u e s i p f i xu ee o bt l v T n e o s i i p o r q b l t l- ae rn h o t o e ae c a e s e ue i tf t e r v d p a i nu iu n d a n n e m o a b rn edr l d s i w se e n t r a e o c u i a ie f e f v i o n e o i ta ao l t o t r e t c i l i r h n d o k l y s s s s c r t f . l , SudheSearc hKiunm Gaurp Atannepu eitm1 upeTtahrvaue no e h a m 8 n r sc n o n hu d es a e o lp o td d e l r u m oi p nu r l s s se gfee ee y u sol fi u t y T i c o spr r ii - l i t r rv f is s Tl s c A at h h yr n c s i r e s lo t t i t e h d mi e e g e t e ga ae v n , i n n i rdd s s a n n e er m T e f i e d. e f ,a o i ee M d d d l n n i t i e u . s s I h ado hi W i i b tt s nt n n T r h o x d eis i t u i eo g g g pof e os o i i , onw t r n n er cr s rd t s r b a io i i l a n n ha h e v d 1 co o d er f et f es c e i s o 9 o ei s e f h C x u u er r l o m 5 tu r s a e ct o t c n s o y u h 0 b l d i ta i eb o t tt e c u or e k s r b ii i l a t c a o se c o a n l ln r o , e a e n ,e b c tsk t l g u t n r s v o o n d r k 1 a o g g o aa i ,a c ae r k e d4 s o e f h s f lf n ea nfur s 8 o r i k p t hc i dt n o d si F . e l o t l a e m he d T p w f -o i d i o r s i r s c n e a c n h , e e i f s a t tr t l a d t el w s i e s s w s ii t m t bp h o io d h ao a f h t w r ai e w nn ief i s u i c u e a n st e r e o d h P i h t d l e r no c Ms t a e n c r rs e y el d l f l t eln ae r u d t r T e rf t va r oi m n s i o r s d n’h s ee m b e i si k r ,d s n i u e sc a i c y c n e n m t e f s t e t n oh i gh 2 i er e h d s en ti i a i t eg 0 o c h wv t n h a e d h i s gs e 1o n ael o e w h d i u g p pe sd 0 n i n s u nb z o es n e r m r o , d oos t e e o a tr b e e i a ir m s wd n n el r d w d ye f ia n le .a t o e n a u t n s h i g d g a l c t ho ft t D a g c lh ai e e a a p t a ds 1 a s t e t u e , r o T l r i rn 7l y n o ng o eo yaf p s d e a s 8 p d e n e f d n b a t r b t . ir r du e c 5 e m d ud e h t a o b a p h s d n mc c a t r h pm v c r p oa ie e u u e t oo s oe k e ss wt or g n i n m a m nr l v w r g , s t r l s s e t d a i a h t o b s or h te a i oa r n e o u o t e k f f y e n r inf l r u d an w o d n d n go r o s cen l t M n , oe n im e a t o p ex o e d g nw th i c m T t p n h of n f t te h r h ie l f t y s c ee p es o e s i a e i eh n n c r o r d uu m c re ct h h ow t g o m 2l s b u g i h a agn l m i u 0 m h a ol s e va t e n twie t 1i q o i e i g e p o m e d d l an 8 o inu i t a a ts n r s i el i . h o e a a e i s e i n n n t nr t o o r r r r k s s a d d og e e a e a s yf f , ., l KT. G. Vo. pSaaknukmarar
ISBN: 978-81-7164-296-0 I 9 SB 7 N 8 9 8 78 1 -8 7 1 1 -7 6 16 4 4 2 -2 7 7 7 7- 9 9 Indian Counc w il w No wef .wi A c g aDr r .ei o clrhu gil . t in ural Research
ICAR GUIDELINES FOR
Evaluation of Probiotics in Livestock and Poultry
ISBN:9788171642922
9788171642922 Indian Counc
w
il
w
No wef .wA
ic
g aDr r.ei
o
clr uhgil
.
t
in
ural Research
nyguh Qlyksa dh lqj{kk nd^ul,mgQyr glov n o SK L e y h d R o w k { s[l kyf j ir ; a er sa 'k k g u v x y f k g k { v Zd t ; ; u n sa u h k f u t d si d H k k d d r h m g ¡ ' ] k o h Sf Zr k k k k Q hk or R, k sa Zv s k QQ as] sa] d i m d ' ko l o k v g l k l N k sa h a i nk dy o h f k v d yy kO Q ; ue u =; `f s u }k k y k kq l o f f sx kk sa j , yl F gos a] lak d d y h k f o gh g a Zd ' q f j, i qj f d h a k k k sr { l { zk o sa i f l d h k f llk j d ; q k o k j zc } d qj i kqj u l f ka/ k f { f / d d j o k g {g ~ k k ux iaH k k dK f k R k hk i h /zH sx n k ; ^; e k e o k kk w. ;o k s' u hsa] e k s r a k oh sa A d k Z r H n k sa d g ] d sa k f l n d Ze wf { } d h o SA l e `" k u yk s k ' k d n u s d je di h ob o g f d e k e sf f oSK kl k k d u j ] l jf ] hh f d s L i k H d k h r f sx d F i kn wf u k U , Qk j s g zl u y f d k j f r o v r, s S o l k k / g a os x k j f yL l ; sa d y g u a , f r , ko k d aL S] , d ku o o k o sa F d j ; o n r a h k d ka k V i k e ; a ' f l gy dv n l d wo h k sa Zd v k e j g s' k Z u d i s/ r o h sa [ k L k r V u o h qL r d, d ; k k o j r d r o Ze Z; f i r kk . Q o d ;s/ a s k s k zc k k u k gf sa ,— ZufZv s l a]h / a/ o r q, o k k ' i f ; k u y fe ff F "a sa k L Hd zt k k fk d `n k k F s/ g t sa k U v k ; k f kk u l an s f o f i Sf u k r r 5 k , o/ h qj e ' j 0 h k { ] x o ; d { o f k H sa k r f ka mk s=; k f j l m k fk sa f o d" r o R kk d k i f s sa | o i f k u L g u v l d fk k Q r k L e ; SA n / yf k l fF s kk / s a u ola= u kj k fk i ; Zj aj f yd d k .y r zsLa d { k l l ksa , k r k ] , . l k le s s i y q s r a k o l l r m sa ]z. k d a k jn l kd i tHE E i k x s kc c ç y y qL ; d E u Sf f aa f f af l c r o y H / / h k gh k sx k k ka/ sd d dk jr Zu r r e , k j h h h s a y M MM Mk s[ kkW-k W-W- kW- v d , , Ñ ulk , j" - -- o. i dd ka l h ds-s-- ad ff qe f ell ykJj agag d k
ISBN:978-81-7164-276-2 HHHkkkkkkjjjrrrhhh;;; ÑÑÑfff"""kkk vvvqqquuulllaaa///kkkkkkuuu iiifffjjj"""kkknnn uuubbbZZZ fffnnnYYYyyyhhh
Textbook of Fish Processing Technology
Textbook of
Fish Processing Technology DDR DR U RR M.TS. E V.S .GH RA S ANI J NDA GHHI (REVISED EDITION) Page xii+640 Rs `1200
Postage `100
ISBN:978-81-7164-291-5 Indian Council w No wef w w. A ic g aDr r.ei o clrg uh.il in tural Research US $185
Greenhouses
Design for Indian Agroclimatic Zones Page x+149 Rs `800
Postage `100
US $100
Basic Statistical Techniques in Animal Breeding An B iTa mesica ch lnS tiBqa ruti eesst e iic dna i l n g B T a e si c c h n St iq a u ti e s s t i i c n a l o tT cpb Dtg V a Go o h o s h ao r t fe e a p h aa n s sp i t n i s t rt i d e eo i tu c e c y h e r r ut c bs l t i e h an ie n a S i o s a c t i t o d t a t c o s t s i u a e oo f e i u r k eb ny t i fn dc n A n i o h s dt s a S w g c h n ot a t S e t c e e u i i i i k s i ir t c s o m t n e da g a h a w n b b n e et r al n a e a e ot ca in l ld it l e n e od l c t e A i B n i b s n s k au B m c g r , e s n a a h i d i e r s o ta d n t i n t e u e ic l l ei e t di s n o s A d u su q a i eg i c l p n g a t u a n tcf i i i r i n u c e e c n o h g u m ic a n r e n s n d le o a la d c w c f s r l r o ai l e S s , p pd ht V H p r as c o o la i e ep o i n U u c r e ns t c s e hl f d s n i n t e c o e s b o e d r c a A v e id ga f i n e e ln e w a n s nr a c sr a r i r a o ig d nnl i . m c t r u m d r r i s T h y hm d a yu a a c h . o s , e d U n i l a a eA e s y s u n t il B t n m l n e aa lb i s a tv o i r tu r m a i o e b e e s f e c t l e m r u t o h e a i a ss m d b s l d u on e i S r itw io r r p nd e i n scs e f oo h g eg i P e s e m f h r o d. s o t n a T a o ita o a n s c nn h h p n o r s t g e dd e e e e - t t f , , Animal Breeding
Greenhouses Design for Indian Agroclimatic Zones SRaank Sde .es N he. p S Jh hMa aardnan
ISBN:978-81-7164-294-6
www.icar.org.in Indian Council Noef wA gDreicluhiltural Research
Greenhouses Design for Indian Agroclimatic
Zones
GGGrrreeeeeennnhhhooouuussseeesss DDDeeesssiiigggnnn fffooorrr IIInnndddiiiaaannn AAAgggrrrooocccllliiimmmaaatttiiiccc ZZZooonnneeesss iTio eecaIcfns TctacTspiam r n n t o o o o r u t t c s g xn h f h h l a r t va i o r e r e i r v p m l n p r t v i e e t e g u tu en o s p to pu e h l r c i i r a v c ha s r n v p n s o c b r r b - e l e c wo t a t u t i a o s a i p l r i t b n o u so u n i mi n n r ed o d e t m l d r eI t y o e r i o l r g g i n m e h o i y c n e e or i e e v - d k k g a d d e t h e u s d g o n s n s e i e v e h t n n i i i n es u “ f t aa s cr ti wn e i o d t t c G t n a s e s a i t ' c n t e f d i d s j a t c a ie t i n n p r o a f o v t p z t g ty a ie u e be ar d t n h r l i i e no a r p e r n t l n e e l e g rl c o a g a t c g a e ns s g e c n n t a r i l s c p t o t , t i r i v e a s e o s u d a l t h e w de o c u i o rn e a o s, r i , c i o e a d c o e v si v cd i d d t i e t o n l t t nr o cg e e d l i u i i o a e i m ai a eo y f a . p d tt m c r l r s f b f i t i , b f d i t n e o a i l c n c o e o a g o h s ui i l I a d p l lo o a i g sc e s n n r tc y i r c e d n t t v h n l i uy e, u u s h d i r r c s i yi c n D e v c s n , e s i e l . s s e o i o c t z l a e r t w , s n g u e z s e i L f d ax u l o s ev a. n u e o o i h s d o d al e s a s no ma l t V t a r i n o l ma i i c p e t g i o ne t i n a t r l ao oee o u s d i s t a e n d s c n o p g p o rf n h r . s r s t h . i i n s p e a cl t n f wo i . , e f s e o e o h fe a f . o r n w u s c e m s o r f o h n T e l c l r d a , e s s c r I u i o a i , h e d t r a n u c , c t I ar c c n n c h n i m o s h nt e n d l a s n l h i a c i d d t i t s t a n o i s m a d e bu e e t ay i a e i g p g n i a r g t o p , s d c . o h n ta e i h i e , nnI r a , n o t e n i n u n s t l o o c o s a a n g kn eg a sua m A i p n d t dy a d - t n nr t w h o g s s f s od l i c e f h d d d o s f e r d r , o e u i r e o l o o a h i r f c e e l m n t t s f g a c t o n f m i r y s a , s w s t n t r h i r l u n d s p r e cn r i e i s c m t m e g ui o et es r h eo k t n e s i v c nl r c t d e l a i rn a n d l o i i n uF r t e e l n m , t r s i t t u h , w u f c g m i y s d a i r i a n c cc o sr i s t p , o i n l p s a l ui l t t n a s u a l a t gl a o Zic h l e l . r t y o e o an a s n r d r C a n o e s e n e a w n s e d d r d l ob n s t E e a t e h a n o , e p . i na e at a t n fl n f s o i f e e m s o e m n e s s n e v I i h g w t g n n e m t c ” l t r g a a i o s br y r e h i t c g i , l p s u ie ,i l u e i t y o ny s c n n a o mh c r c e a sn s u m o r c o b o n s h t e n o a i r e tn e i s i lv i t e a cs a o l o pt h s d a , e i i f p o l e M t k d n g o t o l e d a l c n s y r e e r l e y t u h f r r t c ea a u v , e u n h r o , s e s t o s d c p t i ct s c g r e i c r c e i h t t c v h i e r t o c o h e dc w h i y s o ru s i o c s e n e t n s i e a p n a t p r a b s hi d ys m s , g , t n e e e i s e lu , e o , q a s , n c s v g s c a e i d a a a u u i t t t a a a e i l i n n n n n n h e e e f c et o r r r r i i t d h n d d o d d d g d e ee y s s c f ,

