Indian Farming 68(01): 27–30; January 2018
Rice-based cropping systems
for enhancing productivity of food grains in India:
decadal experience of AICRP
Mangal Deep1, R. Mahender Kumar2, Soumya Saha3
and Aarti Singh4
Indian Institute of Rice Research, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad (Telengana) 500 030
While most rice is grown in the kharif (wet-season, roughly July-December), rice is also grown in
the rabi (dry-season, roughly January-June) in many states of India. Approximately 55% of
India's rice crop is irrigated, up from about 45% in 1990; the fraction of rice area that is
irrigated varies by state from <50% irrigated in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Bihar, to
>90% in Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and Haryana. Existing All India
Coordinated Rice Improvement Project at Indian Institute of Rice Research, Hyderabad provides
sufficient information on the decadal changes in the cropping systems research, further to quantify
and reach a future novel research strategy to enhance productivity of rice based cropping systems.
Key words: Cropping systems, Foodgrains, Productivity, Rice
RICE-based cropping system market and domestic needs and ratio of rice and intercrop is preferred
can be described as mix of facilities available with farmers. Some to be 3-4:1.
farming practices that comprises of of the most prominent ones are being Relay/paira/utera cropping: The
rice as the major crop followed by discussed. seed of succeeding crops like lentil,
subsequent cultivation of other crops. Mixed varietal cropping of rice : gram, pea, lathyrus, berseem, linseed
Intercropping of rice and other System of mixing seed of early rice etc. is sown broadcast in maturing
compatible crops is also widely with late maturing deep water rice is rice crop. This practice saves time;
practised in many regions. Rice-based being practices in West Bengal to money (to be spent on land
cropping system is a major cropping avoid total crop loss at the event of preparation etc.) and utilizes residual
system practised in India, which flood. The seed of both the types of fertility. This practice is common in
include the rotation of crops mixed in 1:1 ratio and has given both upland and lowland rice culture.
involving cereals, pulses, oilseeds, higher yield than sole cropping of Sequential cropping in rice:
cotton, sugarcane, green manures, either type. Similarly, growing of a Sequential cropping refers to the
vegetable, etc. Various rice-based mixture of autumn and winter crops grown as preceding or
cropping systems have been reported varieties in 3:1 ratio in Tamil Nadu succeeding with rice as shown below.
from different parts of India ranging and Kerala is frequently in practice.
from rice-rice-rice to rice followed by However, under normal conditions, Rice-based cropping systems research
different cereals, pulses, oilseeds, it has created problems in performing under AICRIP in last decade
vegetables and fibre crops. Rice- agricultural operations like Rice-cereal based cropping system:
based cropping systems may include harvesting, deciding fertilizer doses Rice, maize, and wheat are major
lowland and upland crops. So far, etc. cereals contributing to food security
most people have been focusing on Intercropping rice with other crops: It and income in South Asia. These
individual crops disregarding the fact is a common practice under upland crops are grown either as a
that each crop is only a component of conditions in north and north-eastern monoculture or in rotations in
a cropping system. In rice growing part of the country to grow rice tropical and sub-tropical
areas, several crop combinations intercropped with blackgram, environments of South Asia. In the
(cropping systems) are in practice greengram, sesame, maize, finger irrigated and favourable rainfed
based on agro-ecological conditions, millet or other minor millets. The lowland areas, rice-rice (R-R), rice-
Indian Farming 27
January 2018
Table 1. Rice-based cropping system under (AICRIP) worthwhile to mention that although
organic manures ameliorate the
Irrigated conditions Upland condition Rice under integrated farming system
physical, chemical and biological
Rice-Rice-Rice Rice-Chickpea Rice-Fish-Poultry
properties of the soils, they cannot
Rice-Rice-Cereal Rice-Lentil Rice-Fish-Duckery
substitute chemical fertilizers because
Rice-Rice-Pulses Rice-Mustard/Linseed
Rice-Wheat-Pulse Rice-Barley of the low amount of plant nutrients
Rice-Toria-Wheat Rice-Wheat present in them and because their
Rice-Wheat Rice-Pea bulky nature involves high transport
Rice-Mustard cost. Thus, we can not wholly and
solely depend upon manures for
wheat (R-W), and rice-maize (R-M) productivity, economics, energy and increasing the yield of the rice–wheat
are the predominant cropping environment. Different rice-based cropping system. The main bio-
systems Table 1. Rice-rice is common crop rotations were evaluated at 13 fertilizers which can be used as
in tropical climate with distinct dry locations to economize the nutrient supplement to chemical fertilizers are
and wet seasons such as in South recommendation, enhancing nutrient blue-green algae and Azolla for rice.
India, and in sub-tropical areas with use efficiency, soil-health and sustain Blue-green algae are capable of fixing
mild cool winter climate such as in productivity. The result showed that atmospheric nitrogen, particularly
Bangladesh, Eastern India, and rice-maize rotation (Table 2) under puddled rice soils, contributing
Eastern Nepal. The rice-wheat system produced the highest rice equivalent about 50–100 kg N/ha. They also
of India are important for food yield (10.2 tonne/ha) and gross produce growth-promoting
security of the country, and for the monetary returns (` 59,110/ha). substances. In simple terms,
livelihoods of the many millions of Integrated Nutrient Management
farming families and others employed Table 2. System productivity and gross system refers to a balanced use of
return of different rice based
in aspects of the value chain. Most of chemical fertilizers in combination
cropping system
the R-W area is located on the Indo- with organic manures, crop residues,
Gangetic Plains (IGP), with 10 Mha Cropping REY Gross return bio-fertilizers and other biological
systems (tonne/ha) (`/ha)
in India, 2 Mha in Pakistan, 0.5 Mha sources. Multi-locational trials
each in Nepal and Bangladesh. The Rice-rice 7.8 45,124 conducted at different parts of the
Rice-wheat 8.4 48,882
two small north-west Indian states of country revealed that rice-based
Rice-maize 10.2 59,110
Punjab and Haryana, located mostly cropping systems performed better
Rice-pulse 8.5 49,152
in the Indus basin, provide about half under green manure and farmyard
Rice-oilseed 7.0 40,472
the rice and 85% of the wheat manure applied plots than those of
REY, Rice equivalent yield
procured by the Indian government. without organic manure applied
Multi-locational trials on rice-wheat Nutrient management strategy for plots. Similarly, nutrient management
systems under AICRIP showed that rice-based cropping system: In in different seasons also plays an
transplanting method was found to developing countries such as India, important role in productivity of a
be superior over direct seeded the most important challenge is to system (Table 3).
method and application of organics provide sufficient food for the Micronutrient plays a major role in
+ farmyard manure and micro- growing population at affordable enhancing the productivity of any
nutrients enhanced system prices from inelastic land areas. The cropping system. The experiment
productivity at most of the locations. application of agro-chemicals resulted revealed that addition of micro-
R-M systems exist in all climate in a many-fold increase in agriculture nutrients substantially improved rice
ranging from tropical to sub-tropical production but at the cost of soil grain yields in sandy loam soils of
to warm temperates. Rice-maize health. For the present level of Kanpur and addition of organic
systems, however, are less extensive as production, the estimated nitrogen– matter during previous kharif had
compared to R-W or R-R, if total phosphorus–potassium removal is positive residual effect in succeeding
area under these cereal systems is about 28 metric tonne, resulting in a wheat crop productivity and recorded
considered. Higher productivity with negative balance of about 10 metric additional higher grain yield either
sustainability remains the major tonnes. To fulfill such a negative with soil or spray application of
concern of any crop planning. Any balance of fertilizers, there is an micro-nutrients.
system which requires less input and urgent need to identify suitable Conservation agriculture: Various
contributes more is considered to be integrated plant nutrient systems for forms of conservation agriculture are
the efficient. In recent years, oilseeds different crops and cropping systems. now being practised in over 157
and legumes are receiving more Rice–wheat cropping system is an million ha globally but mostly in
attention owing to limited important cropping system of large mechanized farms in rainfed
production and higher prices. northern India. In rice–wheat and supplementary irrigation areas.
Inclusion of these crops in the cropping systems, green manuring There is much less application of
sequence changes the economics of has proved a feasible and reliable conservation agriculture in rice-based
the cropping system. There is a closer practice to improve the productivity systems which support
relationship between cropping system and soil fertility as well. It is predominantly smallholder farms.
28 Indian Farming
January 2018
Table 3. Productivity of rice-based cropping system under seasonal nutrient management FUTURE STRATEGY
Treatments Rice-rice Rice-wheat Rice-maize Rice-pulse Rice-oilseed 1. Intensify crops in rice-based
production systems by increasing
Control 8.54 4.67 7.3 5.56 5.53
the number of crops grown on the
50% RFD (K) 7.20 6.10 9.12 7.84 6.80
same land each year following the
100% RFD (K) 7.56 8.88 10.19 8.81 7.61
main rice crop. Crop intensi-
150% RFD (K) 7.78 9.27 10.47 9.26 8.19
fication may be achieved by using
50% RFD (K and R) 7.97 7.39 10.48 8.52 7.12
shorter season varieties, improving
100% RFD (K and R) 8.74 11.14 11.80 9.68 8.65
on-farm water and soil fertility
150% RFD (K and R) 9.06 11.6 12.01 10.21 9.05
management (e.g. water-
RFD harvesting practices, minimum
tillage, supplementary irrigation),
Table 4. Impacts of conservation agriculture on productivity of rice-based cropping systems
and introducing rotation crops.
Treatments Rice-rice Rice-linseed
2. Boost yields by improving the
Conventional tillage with hybrid 13.15 10.0 efficiency of water and nutrient
Conventional tillage with high yield variety 12.54 9.08 use. The entry point for yield
Zero tillage with hybrid 8.96 7.74 enhancement is to improve the
Zero tillage with high-yield variety 8.19 7.15 crop water-use efficiency of both
Minimum tillage with hybrid 10.07 9.02 irrigated and dryland components
Minimum tillage with hybrid 9.50 8.19 of rice-based systems. Water
productivity gains will need to be
Conventional tilled rice-rice system of food production on account of underpinned by sustainable soil
produced the highest system changing climate, a combination of fertility. This will necessitate
productivity compared to other water and nutrient management targeted research to develop site-
tillage management practices (Table practices were tested aimed at water specific nutrient management
4). Similarly, rice-linseed system also and nitrogen saving in rice and systems, including more efficient
produced the highest system rice-based cropping system. For this use of fertilizers, soil ameliorants,
productivity than other tillage purpose, an experiment was done green and animal manures, and
management practices. It is during kharif 2013. The study residues. Tailoring agronomic
concluded that reduced tillage indicated that non-puddled rice crop practices (e.g. weed management,
negatively affected the rice-based establishment is promising at planting methods) to local
cropping system than conventional Coimbatore and at other locations conditions will further enhance
tillage practices. and it can be made as productive as water and nutrient efficiency.
transplanted rice with resorting to 3. Improve livestock production by
Climate resilient management practices split application of N, use of integrating animals more
Indian agriculture faces the dual biofertilizers to substitute 50% N effectively with rice-based
challenge of feeding more than a and crop residue retention at most of cropping systems. Livestock
billion people in a changing climatic the locations. Further, non-puddled production is highly dependent
and economic scenario. Agriculture rice didn’t influence the grain yields upon feed sourced from crops –
is the main source of livelihood for of rabi crops except at Coimbatore. grains and tubers, stover, green
almost 60% of the country’s total Climate resilient management forage, and processing by-
population. The impacts of climate practices (Split application of products – together with weeds
change on agriculture will be severely fertilizer + biofertilizer + crop within and beside crops. The
felt in India. It has been projected residue retention) are more transformation of poor farmers
that under the scenario of a 2.50C to promising than conventional from livestock keepers to active
4.90C temperature rise, rice yields practices (Fig. 1). market-oriented producers will
will drop by 32-40% and wheat require improvements in livestock
yields by 41 to 52%. As Indian reproduction and nutrition
agriculture is highly dependent on coupled with better access to
specific climatic conditions, the markets.
research on the impact of climate 4. Strengthen policy settings by
change on agriculture in general and improving understanding of the
rice production in specific is a high linkages with, and impacts on,
priority in India. There is an urgent food security. Food security is
need to focus on climate resilient affected by the mix of policy
input management practices for settings at local to international
improving use efficiency and scales. Achieving more productive
sustaining the rice and rice-based and sustainable rice-based
cropping systems across the country. Fig. 1. Climate resilient management practices cropping systems will necessitate
To address the issues of sustainability in rice-based cropping systems better understanding of and
Indian Farming 29
January 2018
integration across formal and productivity of rice-based are very diverse. These varied
informal policies, especially in the cropping system in India. cropping systems occur across a
arenas of agricultural industry and varied environment (e.g. weather,
SUMMARY
trade, land and water resources soils, topography), so quantitative
management, agricultural Rice is a dominant crop; about assessment of a number of the
extension systems, and marketing 20% of global total human food ‘outputs’ of agriculture (e.g., crop
systems for rice and related calories are supplied by rice. More yield, water use, soil erosion, nutrient
products. than 150 million ha were sown with leaching, greenhouse gas emissions)
5. Build capacity of individuals and rice in 2002, 90% of that in Asia. will benefit from detailed study of
institutions by establishing Demand for rice in Asia is projected cropping systems and environmental
effective collaborative to increase by 70% over the next 30 variables.
relationships and facilitating years. At ~45 million ha, India has
knowledge sharing. Effective and the largest national area of rice 1-3,4Scientist, 2Principal Scientist,
corresponding auhor e mail:
lasting results for food security cropping . Much of this rice area is
Mangal.iari@gmial.com
will depend upon developing multi-cropped, and cropping patterns
strong in country capacity for
framing, conducting and Indian Farming Disclaimer
extending R&D. This capacity
• All disputes are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of competent courts and forums in
extends from individual Delhi/New Delhi only.
researchers to the broader • The Council does not assume any responsibility for opinions offered by the authors in
institutional arrangements. The the articles and no material in any form can be reproduced without permission of the
Council.
principal mechanism for capacity
• The Council is not responsible for any delay, whatsoever, in publication/delivery of the
building is through partnering of
periodicals to the subscribers due to unforeseen circumstances or postal delay.
agricultural research institutions,
• Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money,
universities, Krishi Vigyan
incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement
Kendras, state agriculture appearing in this publication.
departments and all other • The Council does not vouch for any claims made by the authors, advertisers of products
agriculture related functionaries in and service.
country to jointly deliver a model • The publisher and the editor of the publication shall not be held liable for any
consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.
for sustainable enhancement of
Indian Farming
Article Certificate
I.D. No:
Article entitled: ……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
It is certified that:
1. The articles has been seen by all the authors (signature given below), who are satisfied with its form and contents.
2. Due credit of authorship has been given to every scientist who has notable contribution to the paper, and we are
satisfied with the sequence in which the author’s names appear in the by-line (author’s name).
3. The by-line of the article does not include any name of a scientist who has not made a notable contribution to the
paper.
4. The address of the institute appearing below the by line is that of the institute where the research was conducted
and not that of the institute where the first author (for the author who has sent the paper) is currently employed.
5. The results reported in the article have not been simultaneously sent for publication in any other journal.
6. The article has not been rejected for publication in any other journal.
7. If published the copyright of this article would vest in the INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEACRH, which has the right to enter into any agreement with any organization in India or abroad engaged in
reprography, photocopy, storage and dissemination of information contained in it, and neither we nor our legal
heirs will have any claims on any royalty.
Signature Name in Full and designation, Present official address Subscription with
Address date number
OPTIONAL
The above certificate is correct to the best of my knowledge and I have no objection to the publication of the article
cited above in Indian Farming.
Signature and address of Head
of the department/head of the institute
30 Indian Farming
January 2018